Electronic content includes: 
*160 practice exam questions 
 Fully customizable test engine 



OCA Java SE 8 
Programmer I Exam Guide 

(Exam 1Z0-808) 


ORACLE 

Certified Associate 

Java SE 8 Program mar 



Complete Exam Preparation 


Kathy Sierra, SCJP 
Bert Bates, scjp, oca, ocp 


Oracle 

Press 















ORACLE 


Oracle Press" 


OCA Java SE 8 
Programmer I 
Exam Guide 

(Exam 1 Z 0 - 808 ) 


Kathy Sierra 
Bert Bates 


McGiaw-JHill Education is an indepen deni entity from Grade Corporation and is 
not affiliated with Grade Corporation in any manner This publication and digital content 
may Ire used in assisting students to prepare for the Oracle Certified Associate 
Java |,g Programmer I exam. Neither Oracle Corporation nor McGraw-Hill Education 
warrants that use of this publication and digital content will ensure passing the relevant 
exam, Oracle" and/or Java" 11 are registered trademarks of Orade and/or its affiliates. 

Other names may be trademarks of their respective owners. 


Me 

Graw 

Hill 

Education 


N'fw York Outrage San Franosce 
AtlKns London Madrid MttdKo City 
MiLm iSVw IXHhi Sinppim- Sydney TOAMVB 







Copyright  2017 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United 
States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or 
by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the 
publisher, with the exception that the program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer 
system, but they may not be reproduced for publication. 

ISBN: 978-1-26-001138-8 
MHID: 1-26-001138-0. 

The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this tide: ISBN: 978-1-26-001136-4, 
MHID: 1-26-001136-4. 

eBook conversion by codeMantra 
Version 1.0 

All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every 
occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the benefit of the 
trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such designations appear in 
this book, they have been printed with initial caps. 

McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales 
promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a representative, please visit the Contact 
Us page at www.mhprofessional.com. 

Oracle and Java are registered trademarks of Oracle Corporation and/or its affiliates. All other 
trademarks are the property of their respective owners, and McGraw-Hill Education makes no claim of 
ownership by the mention of products that contain these marks. 

Screen displays of copyrighted Oracle software programs have been reproduced herein with the 
permission of Oracle Corporation and/or its affiliates. 

Oracle Corporation does not make any representations or warranties as to the accuracy, adequacy, or 
completeness of any information contained in this Work, and is not responsible for any errors or 
omissions. 


TERMS OF USE 


This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the 
work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and 
the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may not decompile, disassemble, reverse 
engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, 
publish or sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill Educations prior consent. You may 
use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is stricdy 
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms. 

THE WORK IS PROVIDED AS IS. McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE 
NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR 
COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING 
ANY INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR 
OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors do not warrant or 
guarantee that the functions contained in the work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be 
uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or 
anyone else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages 
resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any information 
accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill Education and/or its licensors be 
liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the 
use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such 
damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or 
cause arises in contract, tort or otherwise. 



CONTRIBUTORS 


About the Authors 

Kathy Sierra was a lead developer for the SCJP exam for Java 5 and Java 6. Kathy worked as a Sun 
master trainer, and in 1997, founded JavaRanch.com (now named Coderanch.com), the worlds largest 
Java community website. Her bestselling Java books have won multiple Software Development 
Magazine awards, and she is a founding member of Oracles Java Champions program 

These days, Kathy is developing advanced training programs in a variety of domains (from 
horsemanship to computer programming), but the thread that ties all her projects together is helping 
learners reduce cognitive load. 

Bert Bates was a lead developer for many of Suns Java certification exams, including the SCJP for Java 
5 and Java 6. Bert was also one of the lead developers for Oracles OCA 7 and OCP 7 exams and a 
contributor on Oracles OCA 8 and OCP 8 exams. He is a forum moderator on Coderanch.com (formerly 
JavaRanch.com) and has been developing software for more than 30 years (argh!). Bert is the co-author of 
several bestselling Java books, and hes a founding member of Oracles Java Champions program Now 
that the book is done, Bert plans to go whack a few tennis balls around and once again start riding his 
beautiful Icelandic horse, Eyrraros fra Gufudal-Fremri. 


About the Technical Review Team 

This is the fifth edition of the book that weve cooked up. The first version we worked on was for Java 2. 
Then we updated the book for the SCJP 5, again for the SCJP 6, again for the OCA 7 and OCP 7 exams, 
and now for the OCA 8. Every step of the way, we were unbelievably fortunate to have fantastic, 
JavaRanch.com-centric technical review teams at our sides. Over the course of the last 14 years, weve 
been evolving the book more than rewriting it. Many sections from our original work on the Java 2 
book are still intact. On the following pages, wed like to acknowledge the members of the various 
technical review teams who have saved our bacon over the years. 


About the Java 2 Technical Review Team 

Johannes de Jong has been the leader of our technical review teams forever and ever. (He has more 
patience than any three people we know.) For the Java 2 book, he led our biggest team ever. Our sincere 
thanks go out to the following volunteers who were knowledgeable, diligent, patient, and picky, picky, 
picky! 

Rob Ross, Nicholas Cheung, Jane Griscti, Ilja Preuss, Vincent Brabant, Kudret Serin, Bill Seipel, Jing 
Yi, Ginu Jacob George, Radiya, LuAnn Mazza, Anshu Mishra, Anandhi Navaneethakrishnan, Didier 
Varon, Mary McCartney, Harsha Pherwani, Abhishek Misra, and Suman Das. 



About the SC JP 5 Technical Review Team 



Mark Mikalai Seema Valentin 


We dont know who burned the most midnight oil, but we can (and did) count everybodys editsso in 
order of most edits made, we proudly present our Superstars. 

Our top honors go to Kristin Strombergevery time you see a semicolon used correcdy, tip your hat 
to Kristin. Next up is Burk Hufnagel who fixed more code than we care to admit. Bill Mietelski and 
Gian Franco Casula caught every kind of error we threw at themawesome job, guys! Devender 
Thareja made sure we didnt use too much slang, and Mark Spritzler kept the humor corning. Mikalai 
Zaikin and Seema Manivannan made great catches every step of the way, and Marilyn de Queiroz and 
Valentin Crettaz both put in another stellar performance (saving our butts yet again). 

Marcelo Ortega, Jef Cumps (another veteran), Andrew Monkhouse, and Jeroen Sterken rounded out 
our crew of Superstarsthanks to you all. Jim Yingst was a member of the Sun exam creation team, and 
he helped us write and review some of the twistier questions in the book (bwa-ha-ha-ha). 

As always, every time you read a clean page, thank our reviewers, and if you do catch an error, its 





































most certainly because your authors messed up. And oh, one last thanks to Johannes. You rule, dude! 


About the SC JP 6 Technical Review Team 



Fred 



Marc P. 


Marc W. 




Mikalai 


Christophe 



Since the upgrade to the Java 6 exam was like a small surgical strike we decided that the technical 
review team for this update to the book needed to be similarly fashioned. To that end we hand-picked an 
elite crew of JavaRanchs top gurus to perform the review for the Java 6 exam 

Our endless gratitude goes to Mikalai Zaikin. Mikalai played a huge role in the Java 5 book, and he 
returned to help us out again for this Java 6 edition. We need to thank \blha, Anastasia, and Daria for 
letting us borrow Mikalai. His comments and edits helped us make huge improvements to the book. 
Thanks, Mikalai! 

Marc Peabody gets special kudos for helping us out on a double header! In addition to helping us with 
Suns new SCWCD exam, Marc pitched in with a great set of edits for this bookyou saved our bacon 
this winter, Marc! (BTW, we didnt learn until late in the game that Marc, Bryan Basham, and Bert all 
share a passion for ultimate Frisbee!) 






















Like several of our reviewers, not only does Fred Rosenberger volunteer copious amounts of his time 
moderating at JavaRanch, he also found time to help us out with this book. Stacey and Olivia, you have 
our thanks for loaning us Fred for a while. 

Marc Weber moderates at some of JavaRanchs busiest forums. Marc knows his stuff and uncovered 
some really sneaky problems that were buried in the book. While we really appreciate Marcs help, we 
need to warn you all to watch outhes got a Phaser! 

Finally, we send our thanks to Christophe Verreif we can find him It appears that Christophe 
performs his JavaRanch moderation duties from various locations around the globe, including France, 
Wales, and most recendy Tokyo. On more than one occasion Christophe protected us from our own lack of 
organization. Thanks for your patience, Christophe! Its important to know that these guys all donated their 
reviewer honorariums to JavaRanch! The JavaRanch community is in your debt. 


The OCA 7 and OCP 7 Team 

Contributing Authors 



Tom 


Jeanne 


The OCA 7 exam is primarily a useful repackaging of some of the objectives from the SCJP 6 exam On 
the other hand, the OCP 7 exam introduced a vast array of brand-new topics. We enlisted several talented 
Java gurus to help us cover some of the new topics on the OCP 7 exam Thanks and kudos to Tom 
McGinn for his fantastic work in creating the massive JDBC chapter. Several reviewers told us that Tom 
did an amazing job channeling the informal tone we use throughout the book. Next, thanks to Jeanne 
Boyarsky. Jeanne was truly a renaissance woman on this project. She contributed to several OCP 
chapters; she wrote some questions for the master exams; she performed some project management 
activities; and as if that wasnt enough, she was one of our most energetic technical reviewers. Jeanne, we 
cant thank you enough. Our thanks go to Matt Heimer for his excellent work on the Concurrent chapter. 

A really tough topic nicely handled! Finally, Roel De Nijs and Roberto Perillo made some nice 
contributions to the book and helped out on the technical review teamthanks, guys! 


Technical Review Team 







Roel 


Mikalai 



Vijitha Roberto 


Roel, what can we say? Your work as a technical reviewer is unparalleled. Roel caught so many 
technical errors, it made our heads spin. Between the printed book and all the material on the CD, we 
estimate that there are over 1,500 pages of stuff here. Its huge! Roel grinded through page after page, 
never lost his focus, and made this book better in coundess ways. Thank you, Roel! 

In addition to her other contributions, Jeanne provided one of the most thorough technical reviews we 
received. (We think she enlisted her team of killer robots to help her!) 

It seems like no K&B book would be complete without help from our old friend Mikalai Zaikin. 
Somehow, between earning 812 different Java certifications, being a husband and father (thanks to Volha, 
Anastasia, Daria, and Ivan), and being a theoretical fisherman [sic], Mikalai made substantial 
contributions to the quality of the book; were honored that you helped us again, Mikalai. 

Next up, wed like to thank Vijitha Kumara, JavaRanch moderator and tech reviewer extraordinaire. 
We had many reviewers help out during the long course of writing this book, but Vijitha was one of the 
few who stuck with us from Chapter 1 all the way through the master exams and on to Chapter 15. Vijitha, 
thank you for your help and persistence! 

Finally, thanks to the rest of our review team: Roberto Perillo (who also wrote some killer exam 
questions), Jim Yingst (was this your fourth time?), other repeat offenders: Fred Rosenberger, 




















Christophe Verre, Devaka Cooray, Marc Peabody, and newcomer Amit Ghorpadethanks, guys! 


About the OCA 8 Technical Review Team 



Campbell 


Fritz 



Pawel 



Vijitha Tim Roberto 


Due to pilot error on your authors part, the members of the review team for this book were asked to 
work under a tighter-than-ideal schedule. We owe a huge thanks to our six reviewers for this book, who 
leapt to action on short notice and once again made numerous fine contributions to the quality of the book. 
As has become the norm, all our reviewers are moderators at the finest Java community website in the 
whole universe, Coderanch.com 

Our first mention goes to Campbell Ritchie, long-time Coderanch moderator, hiker of steep hills, and, 
by our count, most prolific reviewer for this edition. In other words, Campbell found the most errors. 
Among other pursuits, Campbell is an expert in both pathology and programming, because.. .why not? 
Every time you read an error-free page, think of Campbell and thank him 

In a virtual tie for second place in the errors found competition, we present Pawel Baczyriski and 
Fritz Walraven. Pawel calls Poland his home and is most proud of his wife, Ania, and kids, Szymek and 




































Gabrysia. He is almost as proud of the fact that we have to use a special keyboard to spell his name 
correcdy! 

Fritz hails from the Netherlands, and if we understand correcdy, cheers his kids as they demonstrate 
their athletic prowess in various sports venues around Amersfoort. Fritz has also volunteered at an 
orphanage in Uganda (we hope he teaches those kids Java!). Fritz, if we ever meet in person, Bert hereby 
challenges you to a table tennis match. 

Wed like to give a special shout out to Fritz and Pawel for sticking with us from Chapter 1 all the way 
through to the second practice exam. It was a marathon, and we thank you both. 

Next, wed like to thank returning reviewer Vijitha Kumara. Thats right, hes helped us before and 
yet he volunteered againwow! When Vijitha isnt traveling or hiking, he enjoys what he refers to as 
crazy experiments. We love you, Vijithadont blow yourself up! 

Tim Cooke was there when we needed him, at the beginning of the process and again to help us wrap 
things up. We like Tim even though hes been known to spend time with nefarious functional 
programmers. (We suspect thats where he was when he went missing for a few of the middle-of-the- 
book chapters.) Tim lives in Ireland and started programming at an early age on an Amstrad CPC 464. 
Nice! 

Finally, a special thanks to another veteran of the technical review team, Roberto Perillo. Thanks for 
coming back to help us again Roberto. Roberto is a family man who loves spending time with his son, 
Lorenzo. Once Lorenzo has gone to bed, Roberto is known to play a bit of guitar or cheer for the Sao 
Paulo Futebol Clube (we think this is a soccer team). 

You guys are all awesome. Thanks for your wonderful assistance. 


For Audi 


For Bob 



CONTENTS AT A GLANCE 


1 Declarations and Access Control 

2 Object Orientation 

3 Assignments 

4 Operators 

5 Flow Control and Exceptions 

6 Strings, Arrays, ArrayLists, Dates, and Lambdas 
A About the Download 

Index 



CONTENTS 


Acknowledgments 

Preface 

Introduction 

1 Declarations and Access Control 

Java Refresher 

Features and Benefits of Java (OCA Objective 1.5) 

Identifiers and Keywords (OCA Objectives 1.2 and 2.1) 

Legal Identifiers 

Oracles Java Code Conventions 

Define Classes (OCAObjectives 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, 6.4, and 7.5) 

Source File Declaration Rules 
Using the javac and java Commands 
Using public static void main(String[ ] args) 

Import Statements and the Java API 

Static Import Statements 

Class Declarations and Modifiers 

Exercise 1-1: Creating an Abstract Superclass and Concrete Subclass 

Use Interfaces (OCAObjective 7.5) 

Declaring an Interface 
Declaring Interface Constants 
Declaring default Interface Methods 
Declaring static Interface Methods 

Declare Class Members (OCA Objectives 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 4.1, 4.2, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4) 
Access Modifiers 
Nonaccess Member Modifiers 
Constructor Declarations 
Variable Declarations 

Declare and Use enums (OCA Objective 1.2) 

Declaring enums 

Certification Summary 
/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 

Self Test Answers 

2 Object Orientation 

Encapsulation (OCA Objectives 6.1 and 6.5) 




Inheritance and Polymorphism (OCA Objectives 7.1 and 7.2) 

The Evolution of Inheritance 
IS-A and HAS-A Relationships 
Polymorphism (OCA Objective 7.2) 

Overriding/Overloading (OCA Objectives 6.1 and 7.2) 

Overridden Methods 
Overloaded Methods 
Casting (OCA Objectives 2.2 and 7.3) 

Implementing an Interface (OCA Objective 7.5) 

Java 8Now with Multiple Inheritance! 

Legal Return Types (OCA Objectives 2.2 and 6.1) 

Return Type Declarations 
Returning a Value 

Constructors and Instantiation (OCA Objectives 6.3 and 7.4) 

Constructor Basics 
Constructor Chaining 
Rules for Constructors 

Determine Whether a Default Constructor Will Be Created 
Overloaded Constructors 

Initialization Blocks (OCA Objectives 1.2 and 6.3-ish) 

Statics (OCAObjective 6.2) 

Static Variables and Methods 
Certification Summary 
/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 

Self Test Answers 

3 Assignments 

Stack and HeapQuick Review 

Literals, Assignments, and Variables (OCA Objectives 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3) 

Literal Values for All Primitive Types 
Assignment Operators 
Exercise 3-1: Casting Primitives 
Scope (OCAObjective 1.1) 

Variable Scope 

Variable Initialization (OCA Objectives 2.1, 4.1, and 4.2) 

Using a Variable or Array Element That Is Uninitialized and Unassigned 
Local (Stack, Automatic) Primitives and Objects 
Passing Variables into Methods (OCA Objective 6.6) 

Passing Object Reference Variables 
Does Java Use Pass-By-Value Semantics? 

Passing Primitive Variables 
Garbage Collection (OCA Objective 2.4) 




Overview of Memory Management and Garbage Collection 
Overview of Javas Garbage Collector 

Writing Code That Explicitly Makes Objects Eligible for Collection 
Exercise 3-2: Garbage Collection Experiment 
Certification Summary 
/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 

Self Test Answers 

4 Operators 

Java Operators (OCAObjectives 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) 

Assignment Operators 
Relational Operators 
instanceof Comparison 
Arithmetic Operators 
Conditional Operator 
Logical Operators 
Operator Precedence 
Certification Summary 
/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 

Self Test Answers 

5 Flow Control and Exceptions 

Using if and switch Statements (OCA Objectives 3.3 and 3.4) 
if-else Branching 
switch Statements 

Exercise 5-1: Creating a switch-case Statement 
Creating Loops Constructs (OCA Objectives 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, and 5.5) 

Using while Loops 
Using do Loops 
Using for Loops 
Using break and continue 
Unlabeled Statements 
Labeled Statements 

Exercise 5-2: Creating a Labeled while Loop 
Handling Exceptions (OCA Objectives 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5) 

Catching an Exception Using try and catch 
Using finally 

Propagating Uncaught Exceptions 

Exercise 5-3: Propagating and Catching an Exception 

Defining Exceptions 

Exception Hierarchy 






Handling an Entire Class Hierarchy of Exceptions 
Exception Matching 

Exception Declaration and the Public Interface 
Exercise 5-4: Creating an Exception 
Rethrowing the Same Exception 
Common Exceptions and Errors (OCA Objective 8.5) 

Where Exceptions Come From 
JVM-Thrown Exceptions 
Programmatically Thrown Exceptions 
A Summary of the Exams Exceptions and Errors 
Certification Summary 
/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 

Self Test Answers 

6 Strings, Arrays, ArrayLists, Dates, and Lambdas 

Using String and StringBuilder (OCA Objectives 9.2 and 9.1) 
The String Class 

Important Facts About Strings and Memory 
Important Methods in the String Class 
The StringBuilder Class 
Important Methods in the StringBuilder Class 
Working with Calendar Data (OCA Objective 9.3) 
Immutability 
Factory Classes 

Using and Manipulating Dates and Times 
Formatting Dates and Times 
Using Arrays (OCA Objectives 4.1 and 4.2) 

Declaring an Array 
Constructing an Array 
Initializing an Array 

Using ArrayLists and Wrappers (OCA Objectives 9.4 and 2.5) 
When to Use ArrayLists 
ArrayList Methods in Action 
Important Methods in the ArrayList Class 
Autoboxing with ArrayLists 
The Java 7 Diamond Syntax 
Advanced Encapsulation (OCA Objective 6.5) 

Encapsulation for Reference Variables 
Using Simple Lambdas (OCA Objective 9.5) 

Certification Summary 
/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 



Self Test Answers 


A About the Download 

System Requirements 

Downloading from McGraw-Hill Professionals Media Center 
Installing the Practice Exam Software 
Running the Practice Exam Software 
Practice Exam Software Features 
Removing Installation 
Help 

Technical Support 

Windows 8 Troubleshooting 
McGraw-Hill Education Content Support 


Index 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



athy and Bert would like to thank the following people: 


 All the incredibly hard-working folks at McGraw-Hill Education: Tim Green (whos 
been putting up with us for 14 years now), Lisa McClain, and LeeAnn Pickrell. Thanks for all your 
help and for being so responsive, patient, flexible, and professional, and the nicest group of people 
we could hope to work with. 


 All our friends at Kraftur (and our other horse-related friends) and, most especially, to Sherry, 
Steinar, Stina and the girls, Kacie, DJ, Jec, Leslie and David, Annette and Bruce, Lucy, Cait, and 
Jennifer, Gabrielle, and Mary. Thanks to Pedro and Ely. 


 Some of the software professionals and friends who helped us in the early days: Tom Bender, 
Peter Loerincs, Craig Matthews, Leonard Coyne, Morgan Porter, and Mike Kavenaugh. 


 Dave Gustafson for his continued support, insights, and coaching. 


m Our wonderful contact and friend at Oracle, Yvonne Prefontaine. 


 Our great friends and gurus: Simon Roberts, Bryan Basham, and Kathy Collina. 

 Stu, Steve, Burt, and Marc Hedlund for injecting some fun into the process. 

 To Eden and Skyler, for being horrified that adultsout of schoolwould study this hard for 
an exam 


 To the Coderanch Trail Boss, Paul Wheaton, for running the best Java community site on the 
Web, and to all the generous and patient JavaRanch, er, Coderanch moderators. 

 To all the past and present Java instructors for helping to make learning Java a fun experience, 
including (to name only a few) Alan Petersen, Jean Tordella, Georgianna Meagher, Anthony 
Orapallo, Jacqueline Jones, James Cubeta, Teri Cubeta, Rob Weingruber, John Nyquist, Asok 
Perumainar, Steve Stelting, Kimberly Bobrow, Keith Radiff, and the most caring and inspiring Java 
guy on the planet, Jari Paukku. 

 Our furry and feathered friends: Eyra, Kara, Draumur, Vafi, Boi, Niki, and Bokeh. 

 Finally, to Eric Freeman and Beth Robson for your continued inspiration. 



PREFACE 



his books primary objective is to help you prepare for and pass Oracles OCA Java SE 8 
Programmer I certification exam. 

This book follows closely both the breadth and the depth of the real exams. For instance, 
after reading this book, you probably wont emerge as an OO guru, but if you study the material and do 
well on the Self Tests, youll have a basic understanding of OO, and youll do well on the exam. After 
completing this book, you should feel confident that you have thoroughly reviewed all the objectives that 
Oracle has established for these exams. 


In This Book 

This book is organized into six chapters to optimize your learning of the topics covered by the OCA 8 
exam. Whenever possible, weve organized the chapters to parallel the Oracle objectives, but sometimes 
well mix up objectives or partially repeat them to present topics in an order better suited to learning the 
material. 


In Every Chapter 

Weve created a set of chapter components that call your attention to important items, reinforce important 
points, and provide helpful exam-taking hints. Take a look at what youll find in every chapter: 

 Every chapter begins with the Certification Objectiveswhat you need to know in 
order to pass the section on the exam dealing with the chapter topic. The Certification 
Objective headings identify the objectives within the chapter, so youll always know an 
objective when you see it! 





Exam Watch notes call attention to information about, and potential pitfalls in, the exam. 
Because we were on the team that created these exams, we know what youre about to go 
through! 


 r* the 


 On the Job callouts discuss practical aspects of certification topics that might not 





occur on the exam, but that will be useful in the real world. 

I; Exercises are interspersed throughout the chapters. They help you master skills that 
are likely to be an area of focus on the exam. Dont just read through the exercises; they are 
hands-on practice that you should be comfortable completing. Learning by doing is an 
effective way to increase your competency with a product. 

 From the Classroom sidebars describe the issues that come up most often in the 
training classroom setting. These sidebars give you a valuable perspective into 
certification- and product-related topics. They point out common mistakes and address 
questions that have arisen from classroom discussions. 

 The Certification Summary is a succinct review of the chapter and a restatement of 
salient points regarding the exam. 

/  The Two-Minute Drill at the end of every chapter is a checklist of the main points 
of the chapter. It can be used for last-minute review. 

Q&A  The Self Test offers questions similar to those found on the certification exam, including 
multiple choice and pseudo drag-and-drop questions. The answers to these questions, as 
well as explanations of the answers, can be found at the end of every chapter. By taking the 
Self Test after completing each chapter, youll reinforce what youve learned from that 
chapter, while becoming familiar with the structure of the exam questions. 


INTRODUCTION 


Organization 

This book is organized in such a way as to serve as an in-depth review for the OCA 8 exam, for both 
experienced Java professionals and those in the early stages of experience with Java technologies. Each 
chapter covers at least one major aspect of the exam, with an emphasis on the why as well as the how 
to of programming in the Java language. 

Practice exam software with two 80-question exams is available for download. 


What This Book Is Not 

You will not find a beginners guide to learning Java in this book. All 500+ pages of this book are 
dedicated solely to helping you pass the exam. If you are brand new to Java, we suggest you spend a little 
time learning the basics. You should not start with this book until you know how to write, compile, and 
run simple Java programs. We do not, however, assume any level of prior knowledge of the individual 
topics covered. In other words, for any given topic (driven exclusively by the actual exam objectives), we 
start with the assumption that you are new to that topic. So we assume youre new to the individual topics, 
but we assume that you are not new to Java. 

We also do not pretend to be both preparing you for the exam and simultaneously making you a 
complete Java being. This is a certification exam study guide, and its very clear about its mission. Thats 
not to say that preparing for the exam wont help you become a better Java programmer! On the contrary, 
even the most experienced Java developers often claim that having to prepare for the certification exam 
made them far more knowledgeable and well-rounded programmers than they would have been without 
the exam-driven studying. 


Digital Content 

For more information about the practice exam software, please see the Appendix. 


Some Pointers 

Once youve finished reading this book, set aside some time to do a thorough review. You might want to 
return to the book several times and make use of all the methods it offers for reviewing the material: 

1. Re-read all the Two-Minute Drills, or have someone quiz you. You also can use the drills as 
a way to do a quick cram before the exam. You might want to make some flash cards out of 3 x 5 
index cards that have the Two-Minute Drill material on them. 



2. Re-read all the Exam Watch notes. Remember that these notes are written by authors who 
helped create the exam. They know what you should expectand what you should be on the lookout 
for. 

3. Re-take the Self Tests. Taking the tests right after youve read the chapter is a good idea 
because the questions help reinforce what youve just learned. However, its an even better idea to 
go back later and do all the questions in the book in one sitting. Pretend that youre taking the live 
exam. (Whenever you take the Self Tests, mark your answers on a separate piece of paper. That 
way, you can run through the questions as many times as you need to until you feel comfortable with 
the material.) 

4. Complete the exercises. The exercises are designed to cover exam topics, and theres no 
better way to get to know this material than by practicing. Be sure you understand why you are 
performing each step in each exercise. If there is something you are not clear on, re-read that section 
in the chapter. 

5. Write lots of Java code. Well repeat this advice several times. When we wrote this book, we 
wrote hundreds of small Java programs to help us do our research. We have heard from hundreds of 
candidates who have passed the exam, and in almost every case, the candidates who scored 
extremely well on the exam wrote lots of code during their studies. Experiment with the code 
samples in the book, create horrendous lists of compiler errorsput away your IDE, crank up the 
command line, and write code! 


Introduction to the Material in the Book 

The OCA 8 exam is considered one of the hardest in the IT industry, and we can tell you from experience 
that a large chunk of exam candidates goes in to the test unprepared. As programmers, we tend to learn 
only what we need to complete our current project, given the insane deadlines were usually under. 

But this exam attempts to prove your complete understanding of the Java language, not just the parts of 
it youve become familiar with in your work. 

Experience alone will rarely get you through this exam with a passing mark, because even the things 
you think you know might work just a little differendy than you imagined. It isnt enough to be able to get 
your code to work correcdy; you must understand the core fundamentals in a deep way, and with enough 
breadth to cover virtually anything that could crop up in the course of using the language. 


Who Cares About Certification? 

Employers do. Headhunters do. Programmers do. Passing this exam proves three important things to a 
current or prospective employer: youre smart; you know how to study and prepare for a challenging test; 
and, most of all, you know the Java language. If an employer has a choice between a candidate who has 
passed the exam and one who hasnt, the employer knows that the certified programmer does not have to 
take time to learn the Java language. 

But does it mean that you can actually develop software in Java? Not necessarily, but its a good head 
start. To really demonstrate your ability to develop (as opposed to just your knowledge of the language), 
you should consider pursuing the Java Developer Exam, where youre given an assignment to build a 
program, start to finish, and submit it for an assessor to evaluate and score. 



Taking the Programmers Exam 

In a perfect world, you would be assessed for your true knowledge of a subject, not simply how you 
respond to a series of test questions. But life isnt perfect, and it just isnt practical to evaluate everyones 
knowledge on a one-to-one basis. 

For most of its certifications, Oracle evaluates candidates using a computer-based testing service 
operated by Pearson VUE. To discourage simple memorization, Oracle exams present a potentially 
different set of questions to different candidates. In the development of the exam, hundreds of questions 
are compiled and refined using beta testers. From this large collection, questions are pulled together from 
each objective and assembled into many different versions of the exam. 

Each Oracle exam has a specific number of questions, and the tests duration is designed to be 
generous. The time remaining is always displayed in the corner of the testing screen. If time expires 
during an exam, the test terminates, and incomplete answers are counted as incorrect. 



 a t c h 


Many experienced test-takers do not go back and change answers unless they have a good 
reason to do so. Only change an answer when you feel you may have misread or misinterpreted 
the question the first time. Nervousness may make you second-guess every answer and talk 
yourself out of a correct one. 


After completing the exam, you will receive an e-mail from Oracle telling you that your results are 
available on the Web. As of winter 2017, your results can be found at certview.oracle.com. If you want a 
printed copy of your certificate, you must make a specific request. 


Question F ormat 

Oracles Java exams pose questions in multiple-choice format. 

Multiple-Choice Questions 

In earlier versions of the exam, when you encountered a multiple-choice question, you were not told how 
many answers were correct; but with each version of the exam, the questions have become more difficult, 
so today, each multiple-choice question tells you how many answers to choose. The Self Test questions at 
the end of each chapter closely match the format, wording, and difficulty of the real exam questions, with 
two exceptions: 

Whenever we can, our questions will not tell you how many correct answers exist (we will 
say Choose all that apply). We do this to help you master the material. Some savvy test-takers 
can eliminate wrong answers when the number of correct answers is known. Its also possible, if 
you know how many answers are correct, to choose the most plausible answers. Our job is to 
toughen you up for the real exam! 

n The real exam typically numbers lines of code in a question. Sometimes we do not number 




lines of codemostly so that we have the space to add comments at key places. On the real exam, 
when a code listing starts with line 1, it means that youre looking at an entire source file. If a code 
listing starts at a line number greater than 1, that means youre looking at a partial source file. 
When looking at a partial source file, assume the code you cant see is correct. (For instance, 
unless explicidy stated, you can assume that a partial source file will have the correct import and 
package statements.) 



 a t c h 


When you find yourself stumped answering multiple-choice questions, use your scratch paper 
(or whiteboard) to write down the two or three answers you consider the strongest, then 
underline the answer you feel is most likely correct. Here is an example of what your scratch 
paper might look like when youve gone through the test once: 

21. B or C 

33. A or C 

This is extremely helpful when you mark the question and continue on. You can then return to 
the question and immediately pick up your thought process where you left off. Use this 
technique to avoid having to re-read and rethink questions. You will also need to use your 
scratch paper during complex, text-based scenario questions to create visual images to better 
understand the question. This technique is especially helpful if you are a visual learner. 


Tips on Taking the Exam 

The number of questions and passing percentages for every exam are subject to change. Always check 
with Oracle before taking the exam, at www.Oracle.com 

You are allowed to answer questions in any order, and you can go back and check your answers after 
youve gone through the test. There are no penalties for wrong answers, so its better to at least attempt an 
answer than to not give one at all. 

A good strategy for taking the exam is to go through once and answer all the questions that come to you 
quickly. You can then go back and do the others. Answering one question might jog your memory for how 
to answer a previous one. 

Be very careful on the code examples. Check for syntax errors first: count curly braces, semicolons, 
and parentheses, and then make sure there are as many left ones as right ones. Look for capitalization 
errors and other such syntax problems before trying to figure out what the code does. 

Many of the questions on the exam will hinge on subdeties of syntax. You will need to have a thorough 
knowledge of the Java language in order to succeed. 

This brings us to another issue that some candidates have reported. The testing center is supposed to 
provide you with sufficient writing implements so you can work problems out on paper. In some cases, 
the centers have provided inadequate markers and dry-erase boards that are too small and cumbersome to 
use effectively. We recommend that you call ahead and verify that you will be supplied with a sufficiently 
large whiteboard, sufficiently fine-tipped markers, and a good eraser. What wed really like to encourage 
is for everyone to complain to Oracle and Pearson VUE and have them provide actual pencils and at least 





several sheets of blank paper. 


Tips on Studying for the Exam 

First and foremost, give yourself plenty of time to study. Java is a complex programming language, and 
you cant expect to cram what you need to know into a single study session. It is a field best learned over 
time, by studying a subject and then applying your knowledge. Build yourself a study schedule and stick to 
it, but be reasonable about the pressure you put on yourself, especially if youre studying in addition to 
your regular duties at work. 

One easy technique to use in studying for certification exams is the 15-minutes-per-day effort. Simply 
study for a minimum of 15 minutes every day. It is a small but significant commitment. If you have a day 
where you just cant focus, then give up at 15 minutes. If you have a day where it flows completely for 
you, study longer. As long as you have more of the flow days, your chances of succeeding are excellent. 

We strongly recommend you use flash cards when preparing for the programmers exams. A flash card 
is simply a3x5or4><6 index card with a question on the front and the answer on the back. You 
construct these cards yourself as you go through a chapter, capturing any topic you think might need more 
memorization or practice time. You can drill yourself with them by reading the question, thinking through 
the answer, and then turning the card over to see if youre correct. Or you can get another person to help 
you by holding up the card with the question facing you and then verifying your answer. Most of our 
students have found these to be tremendously helpful, especially because theyre so portable that while 
youre in study mode, you can take them everywhere. Best not to use them while driving, though, except at 
red lights. Weve taken ours everywherethe doctors office, restaurants, theaters, you name it. 

Certification study groups are another excellent resource, and you wont find a larger or more willing 
community than on the Coderanch.com Big Moose Saloon certification forums. If you have a question 
from this book, or any other mock exam question you may have stumbled upon, posting a question in a 
certification forum will get you an answer in nearly all cases within a dayusually, within a few hours. 

Finally, we recommend that you write a lot of little Java programs! During the course of writing this 
book, we wrote hundreds of small programs, and if you listen to what the most successful candidates say 
(you know, those guys who got 98 percent), they almost always report that they wrote a lot of code. 


Scheduling Your Exam 

You can purchase your exam voucher from either Oracle or Pearson VUE. Visit Oracle.com (follow the 
training/certification links) or visit PearsonVue.com for exam scheduling details and locations of test 
centers. 


Arriving at the Exam 

As with any test, youll be tempted to cram the night before. Resist that temptation. You should know the 
material by this point, and if youre groggy in the morning, you wont remember what you studied anyway. 
Get a good nights sleep. 

Arrive early for your exam; it gives you time to relax and review key facts. Take the opportunity to 
review your notes. If you get burned out on studying, you can usually start your exam a few minutes early. 
We dont recommend arriving late. Your test could be cancelled, or you might not have enough time to 



complete the exam. 

When you arrive at the testing center, youll need to provide current, valid photo identification. Visit 
PearsonVue.com for details on the ID requirements. They just want to be sure that you dont send your 
brilliant Java guru next-door neighbor who youve paid to take the exam for you. 

Aside from a brain full of facts, you dont need to bring anything else to the exam room In fact, your 
brain is about all youre allowed to take into the exam! 

All the tests are closed book, meaning you dont get to bring any reference materials with you. Youre 
also not allowed to take any notes out of the exam room The test administrator will provide you with a 
small marker board. If youre allowed to, we do recommend that you bring a water botde or a juice botde 
(call ahead for details of whats allowed). These exams are long and hard, and your brain functions much 
better when its well hydrated. In terms of hydration, the ideal approach is to take frequent, small sips. 
You should also verify how many bio-breaks youll be allowed to take during the exam! 

Leave your phone in the car. It will only add stress to the situation, since they are not allowed in the 
exam room, and can sometimes still be heard if they ring outside of the room Purses, books, and other 
materials must be left with the administrator before entering the exam 

Once in the testing room, youll be briefed on the exam software. You might be asked to complete a 
survey. The time you spend on the survey is not deducted from your actual test timenor do you get more 
time if you fill out the survey quickly. Also, remember the questions you get on the exam will not change 
depending on how you answer the survey questions. Once youre done with the survey, the real clock 
starts ticking and the fun begins. 

The testing software allows you to move forward and backward between questions. Most important, 
there is a Mark check box on the screenthis will prove to be a critical tool, as explained in the next 
section. 


Test-Taking Techniques 

Without a plan of attack, candidates can become overwhelmed by the exam or become sidetracked and 
run out of time. For the most part, if you are comfortable with the material, the allotted time is more than 
enough to complete the exam The trick is to keep the time from slipping away during any one particular 
problem 

Your obvious goal is to answer the questions correcdy and quickly, but other factors can distract you. 
Here are some tips for taking the exam more efficiendy. 


Size Up the Challenge 

First, take a quick pass through all the questions in the exam Cherry-pick the easy questions, answering 
them on the spot. Briefly read each question, noticing the type of question and the subject. As a guideline, 
try to spend less than 25 percent of your testing time in this pass. 

This step lets you assess the scope and complexity of the exam, and it helps you determine how to pace 
your time. It also gives you an idea of where to find potential answers to some of the questions. 

Sometimes the wording of one question might lend clues or jog your thoughts for another question. 

If youre not entirely confident in your answer to a question, answer it anyway, but check the Mark box 
to flag it for later review. In the event you run out of time, at least youve provided a first guess answer, 
rather than leaving it blank. 



Second, go back through the entire test, using the insight you gained from the first go-through. For 
example, if the entire test looks difficult, youll know better than to spend more than a minute or two on 
each question. Create a pacing with small milestonesfor example, I need to answer 10 questions every 
15 minutes. 

At this stage, its probably a good idea to skip past the time-consuming questions, marking them for the 
next pass. Try to finish this phase before youre 50 to 60 percent through the testing time. 

Third, go back through all the questions you marked for review, using the Review Marked button in the 
question review screen. This step includes taking a second look at all the questions you were unsure of in 
previous passes, as well as tackling the time-consuming ones you deferred until now. Chisel away at this 
group of questions until youve answered them all. 

If youre more comfortable with a previously marked question, unmark the Review Marked button 
now. Otherwise, leave it marked. Work your way through the time-consuming questions now, especially 
those requiring manual calculations. Unmark them when youre satisfied with the answer. 

By the end of this step, youve answered every question in the test, despite having reservations about 
some of your answers. If you run out of time in the next step, at least you wont lose points for lack of an 
answer. Youre in great shape if you still have 10 to 20 percent of your time remaining. 


Review Your Answers 

Now youre cruising! Youve answered all the questions, and youre ready to do a quality check. Take yet 
another pass (yes, one more) through the entire test, briefly re-reading each question and your answer. 

Carefully look over the questions again to check for trick questions. Be particularly wary of those 
that include a choice of Does not compile. Be alert for last-minute clues. Youre pretty familiar with 
nearly every question at this point, and you may find a few clues that you missed before. 


The Grand Finale 

When youre confident with all your answers, finish the exam by submitting it for grading. After you finish 
your exam, youll receive an e-mail from Oracle giving you a link to a page where your exam results will 
be available. As of this writing, you must ask for a hard copy certificate specifically or one will not be 
sent to you. 


Retesting 

If you dont pass the exam, dont be discouraged. Try to have a good attitude about the experience, and get 
ready to try again. Consider yourself a little more educated. Youll know the format of the test a little 
better, and youll have a good idea of the difficulty level of the questions youll get next time around. 

If you bounce back quickly, youll probably remember several of the questions you might have missed. 
This will help you focus your study efforts in the right area. 

Ultimately, remember that Oracle certifications are valuable because theyre hard to get. After all, if 
anyone could get one, what value would it have? In the end, it takes a good attitude and a lot of studying, 
but you can do it! 


Objectives Map 



The following table describes the exam objectives and where you will find coverage for them in the 
book. (Note: We have summarized some of the descriptions you will find on the Oracle.com website.) 


Oracle Certified Associate Java SE 8 Programmer (Exam 1Z0-808) 


Exam Objective 

Study Guide Coverage 

lava Basics 

Define the scope of variables (1.1) 

Chapter 3 

Define the structure of a Java class (1.2) 

Chapters 1 and 2 

Create executable lava applications with a main method (1.3) 

Chapter 1 

import other Java packages to make them accessible in your code (1.4) 

Chapter 1 

Compare and contrast features of Java (1.5) 

Chapter 1 

Working with Java Data Types 

Declare and initialize variables (2.1) 

Chapters 1 and 3 

Differentiate between object reference variables and primitive variables (2.2) 

Chapters 1,2, and 3 

Know how to read or write to object fields (2.3) 

Whole book 

Explain an objects lifecycle (creation, "dereference; and garbage collection) (2,4) 

Chapter 3 

Use wrapper classes such as Boolean, Double, Integer (2.5) 

Chapter 6 

Using Operators and Decision Constructs 

Use Java operators (3.1) 

Chapters 1 and 4 

Test equality between Strings and other objects using == and equals() (3.2) 

Chapters 1 and 4 

Create if and if/else and ternary constructs (3.4) 

Chapters 4 and 5 

Use a switch statement (3.5) 

Chapter 5 

Creating and Using Arrays 

Declare, instantiate, initialize and use a one-dimensional array (4.1) 

Chapters 3 and 6 

Declare, instantiate, initialize and use multi-dimensional arrays (4.2) 

Chapters 3 and 6 

Using Loop Constructs 

Create and use while loops (5,1) 

Chapter 5 

Create and use for loops including the enhanced for loop (5.2) 

Chapter 5 

Create and use do/while loops (5.3) 

Chapter 5 

Compare loop constructs (5,4) 

Chapter 5 

Use break and continue (5.5) 

Chapter 5 































Exam Objective 

Study Guide Coverage 

Working with Methods and Encapsulation 

Create methods with arguments and return values (6.1} 

Chapter 2 

1 Apply the static keyword to methods and fields (6.2) 

Chapters t and 2 

Create and overload constructors (6.3) 

Chapters 1 and 2 

Apply access modifiers (6.4) 

Chapter 1 

Apply encapsulation principles to a class (6.5) 

Chapters 2 and 6 

Determine the effect upon object references and primitive values when they are passed into 

Chapter 3 

methods thaL change Lhe values (6,6) 


Working with Inheritance 

Describe inheritance and its benefits (7.1) 

Chapter 2 

Develop code that demonstrates the use of polymorphism (7.2) 

Chapter 2 

Determine when casting is necessary (7.3) 

Chapter 2 

Use super and this to access objects and constructors (7.4) 

Chapter 2 

Use abstract classes and interfaces (7,5) 

Chapters 1 and 2 

Handling Exceptions 

Differentiate among checked exceptions, Runtime Exceptions, and Errors (8.1) 

Chapter 5 

Create a try-catch block and determine how exceptions alter normal program flow (8,2) 

Chapter 5 

Describe the advantages of Exception handling (8,3) 

Chapter 5 

Create and invoke a method that throws an exception (8.4) 

Chapter 5 

Recognize common exception classes (8.5) 

Chapter 5 

Working with Selected Classes from the Java API 

Manipulate data using the StringBuilder class (9.1) 

Chapter 6 

Create and manipulate Strings (9,2) 

Chapter 6 

Create and manipulate calendar data (9.3) 

Chapter 6 

Declare and use an ArrayList (9.4) 

Chapter 6 

Write a simple Lambda expression that consumes a Lambda Predicate expression (9.5) 

Chapter 6 

































1 

Declarations and Access Control 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES 


 Java Features and Benefits 

 Identifiers and Keywords 

 javac, java, main(), and Imports 

 Declare Classes and Interfaces 

 Declare Class Members 

 Declare Constructors and Arrays 

 Create static Class Members 

 Use enums 

/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 


W e assume that because youre planning on becoming certified, you already know the 

basics of Java. If youre completely new to the language, this chapterand the rest of the 
bookwill be confusing; so be sure you know at least the basics of the language before 
diving into this book. That said, were starting with a brief, high-level refresher to put 
you back in the Java mood, in case youve been away for a while. 


Java Refresher 

A Java program is mosdy a collection of objects talking to other objects by invoking each others 
methods. Every object is of a certain type, and that type is defined by a class or an interface. Most Java 
programs use a collection of objects of many different types. Following is a list of a few useful terms for 
this object-oriented (OO) language: 

 Class A template that describes the kinds of state and behavior that objects of its type support. 

 Object At runtime, when the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) encounters the new keyword, it will 
use the appropriate class to make an object that is an instance of that class. That object will have 
its own state and access to all of the behaviors defined by its class. 

State (instance variables) Each object (instance of a class) will have its own unique set of 
instance variables as defined in the class. Collectively, the values assigned to an objects instance 
variables make up the objects state. 



 Behavior (methods) When a programmer creates a class, she creates methods for that class. 
Methods are where the classs logic is stored and where the real work gets done. They are where 
algorithms get executed and data gets manipulated. 

Identifiers and Keywords 

All the Java components we just talked aboutclasses, variables, and methodsneed names. In Java, 
these names are called identifiers, and, as you might expect, there are rules for what constitutes a legal 
Java identifier. Beyond whats legal, though, Java (and Oracle) programmers have created conventions 
for naming methods, variables, and classes. 

Like all programming languages, Java has a set of built-in keywords. These keywords must not be used 
as identifiers. Later in this chapter well review the details of these naming rules, conventions, and the 
Java keywords. 

Inheritance 

Central to Java and other OO languages is the concept of inheritance, which allows code defined in one 
class or interface to be reused in other classes. In Java, you can define a general (more abstract) 
superclass and then extend it with more specific subclasses. The superclass knows nothing of the classes 
that inherit from it, but all of the subclasses that inherit from the superclass must explicidy declare the 
inheritance relationship. A subclass that inherits from a superclass is automatically given accessible 
instance variables and methods defined by the superclass, but the subclass is also free to override 
superclass methods to define more specific behavior. For example, a Car superclass could define general 
methods common to all automobiles, but a Ferrari subclass could override the accelerate! ) method 
that was already defined in the Car class. 

Interfaces 

A powerful companion to inheritance is the use of interfaces. Interfaces are usually like a 100 percent 
abstract superclass that defines the methods a subclass must support, but not how they must be supported. 
In other words, for example, an Animal interface might declare that all Animal implementation classes 
have an eat () method, but the Animal interface doesnt supply any logic for the eat () method. That 
means its up to the classes that implement the Animal interface to define the actual code for how that 
particular Animal type behaves when its eat () method is invoked. Note: As of Java 8, interfaces can 
now include concrete, inheritable methods. We will talk much more about this when we dive into OO in 
the next chapter. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Features and Benefits of Java (OCA Objective 1.5) 

1.5 Compare and contrast the features and components of Java such as: platform independence, object 
orientation, encapsulation, etc. 

Perhaps a great topic to start with, on our official coverage of the OCA 8, is to discuss the various 
benefits that Java provides to programmers. Java is now over 20 years old (wow!) and remains one of the 
most in-demand programming languages in the world. Somewhat confusingly there is a similarly named 



language, JavaScript (an implementation of the ECMA standard), which is also a very popular 
language. Java and JavaScript have some aspects in common, but they are not to be confused; they are 
quite distinct. Lets look at some of the benefits that Java provides to programmers and compare them 
(when appropriate) to some of Javas competitors. A caveat here, many of these benefits are based on 
extremely complex topics. These descriptions are by no means definitive, but theyre sufficient for the 
exam: 


 Object oriented As software systems get larger, they get more difficult to test and enhance. 
For the last several decades, object-oriented (OO) programming has been the dominant software 
design approach for large systems, because well-designed OO systems remain testable and 
enhanceable, even as they grow into huge applications with millions of lines of code. OO design 
also offers a natural way to think about how the components in a system should be constructed and 
how they should interact. The classes, objects, system state, and behaviors in well-designed OO 
systems are easy to map conceptually to their counterparts in the real world. 

 Encapsulation Encapsulation is a key concept in OO programming. Encapsulation allows a 
software component to hide its data from other components, protecting the data from being updated 
without the components approval or knowledge. Java makes encapsulation far easier to achieve 
than in non-OO languages. 

 Memory management Unlike some of its competitors (C and C++), Java provides automatic 
memory management. In languages that dont provide automatic memory management, keeping track 
of memory through pointers is quite complex. Further, tracking down bugs related to memory 
management (often called memory leaks ) is a common, error-prone, and time-consuming process. 

 Huge library Java has an enormous library of prewritten, well-tested, and well-supported 
code. This code is easy to include in your Java applications and is well documented via the Java 
API. Throughout this book we will explore some of the most used (and most useful) members of 
Javas standard core library. 

 Secure by design When compiled Java code is executed, it runs inside the Java Virtual 
Machine (JVM). The JVM provides a secure sandbox for your Java code to run in, and the JVM 
makes sure that nefarious programmers cannot write Java code that will cause trouble on other 
peoples machines when it runs. 

 Write once, run anywhere (cross-platform execution) One of the goals (largely, but not 
perfectly achieved) of Java is that much of the Java code you write can run on many platforms, 
ranging from tiny Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, to phones, to laptop computers, to large servers. 
Another common phrase for this ability to run on many devices is cross-platform. 

 Strongly typed A strongly typed language usually requires the programmer to explicidy 
declare the types of the data and objects being used in the program Strong typing allows the Java 
compiler to catch many potential programming errors before your code even compiles. At the other 
end of the spectrum are dynamically typed languages. Dynamically typed languages can be less 
verbose, faster to code initially, and are often preferred in environments where small teams and 
rapid prototyping are the norm But strongly typed languages like Java come into their own in large 
software shops with many teams of programmers and the need for more reliable, testable, 
production-quality code. 

 Multithreaded Java provides built-in language features and APIs that allow programs to use 
many operating-system processes (hence, many cores) at the same time. As systems grow to 
handle more computationally intensive problems and larger data sets, the ability to use all of a 


computers core processors becomes essential. Multithreaded programming is never simple, but 
Java provides a rich toolkit to make it as easy as possible. 

 Distributed computing Another way to tackle big programming problems is to distribute the 
workload across many machines. The Java API provides several ways to simplify tasks related to 
distributed computing. One such example is serialization, a process in which a Java object is 
converted to a portable form. Serialized objects can be sent to other machines, deserialized, and 
then used as a normal Java object. 

Again, weve just scratched the surface of these complex topics, but if you understand these brief 
descriptions, you should be prepared to handle any questions for this objective. So much for the theory, 
lets get into details... 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Identifiers and Keywords (OCA Objectives 1.2 and 2.1) 

1.2 Define the structure of a Java class. 

2.1 Declare and initialize variables (including casting of primitive data types). 

Remember that when we list one or more Certification Objectives in the book, as we just did, it means 
that the following section covers at least some part of that objective. Some objectives will be covered in 
several different chapters, so youll see the same objective in more than one place in the book. For 
example, this section covers declarations and identifiers, but using the things you declare is covered 
primarily in later chapters. 

So, well start with Java identifiers. The two aspects of Java identifiers that we cover here are 

 Legal identifiers The rules the compiler uses to determine whether a name is legal. 

m Oracles Java Code Conventions Oracles recommendations for naming classes, variables, 
and methods. We typically adhere to these standards throughout the book, except when were trying 
to show you how a tricky exam question might be coded. You wont be asked questions about the 
Java Code Conventions, but we strongly recommend you use them 


Legal Identifiers 

Technically, legal identifiers must be composed of only Unicode characters, numbers, currency symbols, 
and connecting characters (such as underscores). The exam doesnt dive into the details of which ranges 
of the Unicode character set qualify as letters and digits. So, for example, you wont need to know that 
Tibetan digits range from \ u0420 to\u0f29. Here are the rules you do need to know: 

 Identifiers must start with a letter, a currency character ($), or a connecting character such as 
the underscore (_). Identifiers cannot start with a digit! 

I After the first character, identifiers can contain any combination of letters, currency 
characters, connecting characters, or numbers. 

 In practice, there is no limit to the number of characters an identifier can contain. 



 You cant use a Java keyword as an identifier. Table 1-1 lists all the Java keywords. 


TABLE 1-1 


Complete List of Java Keywords (assert added in 1.4, enum added in 


1.5) 


abstract 

boolean 

break 

byte 

case 

catch 

char 

class 

const 

continue 

default 

do 

double 

else 

extends 

final 

finally 

float 

for 

goto 

if 

implements 

import 

instanceof 

int 

interface 

long 

native 

new 

package 

private 

protected 

public 

return 

short 

static 

strictfp 

super 

switch 

synchronized 

this 

throw 

throws 

transient 

try 

void 

volatile 

while 

assert 

enum 






 Identifiers in Java are case sensitive; f oo and foo are two different identifiers. 
Examples of legal and illegal identifiers follow. First some legal identifiers: 

int _a; 
int $c; 

int _2_w; 

int _$; 

int this_is_a_very_detailed_name_for_an_identifier; 


The following are illegal (its your job to recognize why): 


int 

: b ; 

int 

-d; 

int 

e#; 

int 

 f; 

int 

7g; 


Oracles Java Code Conventions 

Oracle estimates that over the lifetime of a standard piece of code, 20 percent of the effort will go into the 
original creation and testing of the code, and 80 percent of the effort will go into the subsequent 
maintenance and enhancement of the code. Agreeing on, and coding to, a set of code standards helps to 
reduce the effort involved in testing, maintaining, and enhancing any piece of code. Oracle has created a 
set of coding standards for Java and published those standards in a document cleverly tided Java Code 
Conventions, which you can find if you start at j ava. oracle. com. Its a great document, short, and easy 
to read, and we recommend it highly. 

That said, youll find that many of the questions in the exam dont follow the code conventions because 
of the limitations in the test engine that is used to deliver the exam internationally. One of the great things 
about the Oracle certifications is that the exams are administered uniformly throughout the world. To 
achieve that, the code listings that youll see in the real exam are often quite cramped and do not follow 
Oracles code standards. To toughen you up for the exam, well often present code listings that have a 
similarly cramped look and feel, often indenting our code only two spaces as opposed to the Oracle 
standard of four. 

Well also jam our curly braces together unnaturally, and well sometimes put several statements on the 
same line...ouch! For example: 













1. class Wombat implements Runnable { 

2. private int i; 

3. public synchronized void run() { 

4. if (i%5 != 0) { i + +; } 

5. for(int x=0; x<5; x++, i++) 

6. {if (x > 1) Thread.yield(); } 

7. System.out.print(i + " " ) ; 

8 . } 

9. public static void main(String[] args) { 

10. Wombat n = new Wombat(); 

11. for(int x=100; x>0; --x) { new Thread(n).start(); } 

12 . } } 

Consider yourself forewarnedyoull see lots of code listings, mock questions, and real exam 
questions that are this sick and twisted. Nobody wants you to write your code like thisnot your 
employer, not your coworkers, not us, not Oracle, and not the exam creation team! Code like this was 
created only so that complex concepts could be tested within a universal testing tool. The only standards 
that are followed as much as possible in the real exam are the naming standards. Here are the naming 
standards that Oracle recommends and that we use in the exam and in most of the book: 

i Classes and interfaces The first letter should be capitalized, and if several words are linked 
together to form the name, the first letter of the inner words should be uppercase (a format thats 
sometimes called CamelCase). For classes, the names should typically be nouns. Here are some 
examples: 

Dog 

Account 

PrintWriter 

For interfaces, the names should typically be adjectives, like these: 

Runnable 

Serializable 

 Methods The first letter should be lowercase, and then normal CamelCase rules should be 
used. In addition, the names should typically be verb-noun pairs. For example: 

getBalance 

doCalculation 

setCustomerName 

 Variables Like methods, the CamelCase format should be used, but starting with a lowercase 
letter. Oracle recommends short, meaningful names, which sounds good to us. Some examples: 

buttonWidth 

accountBalance 

myString 

 Constants Java constants are created by marking variables static and final. They should be 
named using uppercase letters with underscore characters as separators: 


MIN HEIGHT 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Define Classes (OCA Objectives 1.2,1.3,1.4,6.4, and 7.5) 

1.2 Define the structure of a Java class. 

1.3 Create executable Java applications with a main method; run a Java program from the command 
line; including console output, (sic) 

1.4 Import other Java packages to make them accessible in your code. 

6.4 Apply access modifiers. 

7.5 Use abstract classes and interfaces. 

When you write code in Java, youre writing classes or interfaces. Within those classes, as you know, 
are variables and methods (plus a few other things). How you declare your classes, methods, and 
variables dramatically affects your codes behavior. For example, a public method can be accessed from 
code running anywhere in your application. Mark that method private, though, and it vanishes from 
everyones radar (except the class in which it was declared). 

For this objective, well study the ways in which you can declare and modify (or not) a class. Youll 
find that we cover modifiers in an extreme level of detail, and although we know youre already familiar 
with them, were starting from the very beginning. Most Java programmers think they know how all the 
modifiers work, but on closer study they often find out that they dont (at least not to the degree needed for 
the exam). Subde distinctions are everywhere, so you need to be absolutely certain youre completely 
solid on everything in this sections objectives before taking the exam 


Source File Declaration Rules 

Before we dig into class declarations, lets do a quick review of the rules associated with declaring 
classes, import statements, and package statements in a source file: 

n There can be only one public class per source code file. 

 Comments can appear at the beginning or end of any line in the source code file; they are 
independent of any of the positioning rules discussed here. 

 If there is a public class in a file, the name of the file must match the name of the public 
class. For example, a class declared as public class Dog { } must be in a source code file 
named Dog .java. 

 If the class is part of a package, the package statement must be the first line in the source 
code file, before any import statements that maybe present. 

 If there are import statements, they must go between the package statement (if there is one) 
and the class declaration. If there isnt a package statement, then the import statements) must be 
the first line(s) in the source code file. If there are no package or import statements, the class 
declaration must be the first line in the source code file. 

 import and package statements apply to all classes within a source code file. In other 
words, theres no way to declare multiple classes in a file and have them in different packages or 
use different imports. 



 A file can have more than one non-public class. 


 Files with no public classes can have a name that does not match any of the classes in the 
file. 


Using the javac and java Commands 

In this book, were going to talk about invoking the j avac and j ava commands about 1000 times. 
Although in the real world youll probably use an integrated development environment (IDE) most of the 
time, you could see a few questions on the exam that use the command line instead, so were going to 
review the basics. (By the way, we did NOT use an IDE while writing this book. We still have a slight 
preference for the command line while studying for the exam; all IDEs do their best to be helpful, and 
sometimes theyll fix your problems without telling you. Thats nice on the job, but maybe not so great 
when youre studying for a certification exam!) 

Compiling with javac 

The j avac command is used to invoke Javas compiler. You can specify many options when running 
j avac. For example, there are options to generate debugging information or compiler warnings. Heres 
the structural overview for javac: 

javac [options] [source files] 

There are additional command-line options called @argfiles, but theyre rarely used, and you wont 
need to study them for the exam. Both the [options] and the [source files] are optional parts of the 
command, and both allow multiple entries. The following are legal j avac commands: 

javac -help 

javac -version Foo.java Bar.java 

The first invocation doesnt compile any files, but prints a summary of valid options. The second 
invocation passes the compiler an option (-version, which prints the version of the compiler youre 
using) and passes the compiler two . j ava files to compile (Foo . j ava and Bar . j ava). Whenever you 
specify multiple options and/or files, they should be separated by spaces. 

Launching Applications with java 

The j ava command is used to invoke the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). Heres the basic structure of the 
command: 

java [options] class [args] 

The [options] and [args] parts of the java command are optional, and they can both have multiple 
values. You must specify exactly one class file to execute, and the j ava command assumes youre talking 
about a . class file, so you dont specify the . class extension on the command line. Heres an example: 

java -showversion MyClass x 1 

This command can be interpreted as Show me the version of the JVM being used, and then launch the file 
named MyClass. class and send it two String arguments whose values are x and l. Lets look at the 


following code: 


public class MyClass { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.println(args[0] + " " + args[1]); 

} 

} 

Its compiled and then invoked as follows: 
java MyClass x 1 

The output will be 
x l 

Well be getting into arrays in depth later, but for now its enough to know that argslike all arrays 
use a zero-based index. In other words, the first command-line argument is assigned to args [0], the 
second argument is assigned to args [l], and so on. 


Using public static void main(String[ ] args) 

The use of the main () method is implied in most of the questions on the exam, and on the OCA exam it is 
specifically covered. For the .0001 percent of you who dont know, main () is the method that the JVM 
uses to start execution of a Java program. 

First off, its important for you to know that naming a method main () doesnt give it the superpowers 
we normally associate with main (). As far as the compiler and the JVM are concerned, the only version 
of main ( ) with superpowers is the main () with this signature: 

public static void main(String[] args) 

Other versions of main () with other signatures are perfecdy legal, but theyre treated as normal methods. 
There is some flexibility in the declaration of the special main () method (the one used to start a Java 
application): the order of its modifiers can be altered a little; the string array doesnt have to be named 
args; and it can be declared using var-args syntax. The following are all legal declarations for the 
special main( ): 

static public void main(String[] args) 

public static void main(String... x) 

static public void main(String bang_a_gong[]) 

For the OCA 8 exam, the only other thing thats important for you to know is that main () can be 
overloaded. Well cover overloading in detail in the next chapter. 


Import Statements and the Java API 

There are a gazillion Java classes in the world. The Java API has thousands of classes, and the Java 
community has written the rest. Well go out on a limb and contend that all Java programmers everywhere 
use a combination of classes they wrote and classes that other programmers wrote. Suppose we created 


the following: 


public class ArrayList { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.printIn("fake ArrayList class"); 

} 

} 

This is a perfectly legal class, but as it turns out, one of the most commonly used classes in the Java API 
is also named ArrayList, or so it seems.... The API versions actual name is java, util .ArrayList. 
Thats its fully qualified name. The use of fully qualified names is what helps Java developers make sure 
that two versions of a class like ArrayList dont get confused. So now lets say that I want to use the 
ArrayList class from the API: 

public class MyClass { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
java.util.ArrayList<String> a = 

new java.util.ArrayList<String>(); 

} 

} 

(First off, trust us on the <String> syntax; well get to that later.) Although this is legal, its also a LOT 
of keystrokes. Since we programmers are basically lazy (there, we said it), we like to use other peoples 
classes a LOT, AND we hate to type. If we had a large program, we might end up using Array Lists many 
times. 

import statements to the rescue! Instead of the preceding code, our class could look like this: 

import java.util.ArrayList; 
public class MyClass { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

ArrayList<String> a = new ArrayList<String>(); 

}} 

We can interpret the import statement as saying, In the Java API there is a package called ' util ', and 
in that package is a class called ArrayList. Whenever you see the word ArrayList in this class, its 
just shorthand for: ' java, util .ArrayList. (Note: Lots more on packages to come!) If youre a C 
programmer, you might think that the import statement is similar to an #include. Not really. All a Java 
import statement does is save you some typing. Thats it. 

As we just implied, a package typically has many classes. The import statement offers yet another 
keystroke-saving capability. Lets say you wanted to use a few different classes from the j ava .util 
package: ArrayList and T reeSet. You can add a wildcard character (*) to your import statement that 
means, If you see a reference to a class youre not sure of, you can look through the entire package for 
that class, like so: 

import j ava .util.*; 
public class MyClass { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

ArrayList<String> a = new ArrayList<String>(); 

TreeSet<String> t = new TreeSet<String>(); 

} 


} 


When the compiler and the JVM see this code, theyll know to look through j ava. util for Array List 
and TreeSet. For the exam, the last thing youll need to remember about using import statements in your 
classes is that youre free to mix and match. Its okay to say this: 

ArrayList<String> a = new ArrayList<String>(); 

java.util.ArrayList<String> a2 = new java.util.ArrayList<String>(); 


Static Import Statements 

Dear Reader, We really struggled with where to include this discussion of static imports. From a learning 
perspective, this is probably not the ideal location, but from a reference perspective, we thought it made 
sense. As youre learning the material for the first time, you might be confused by some of the ideas in this 
section. If thats the case, we apologize. Put a sticky note on this page and circle back around after youre 
finished with Chapter 3. On the other hand, once youre past the learning stage and youre using this book 
as a reference, we think putting this section here will be quite useful. Now, on to static imports. 

Sometimes classes will contain static members. (Well talk more about static class members later, but 
since were on the topic of imports we thought wed toss in static imports now.) Static class members can 
exist in the classes you write and in a lot of the classes in the Java API. 

As we said earlier, ultimately the only value import statements have is that they save typing and they 
can make your code easier to read. In Java 5 (a long time ago), the import statement was enhanced to 
provide even greater keystroke-reduction capabilities, although some would argue that this comes at the 
expense of readability. This feature is known as static imports. Static imports can be used when you want 
to save typing while using a classs static members. (You can use this feature on classes in the API and 
on your own classes.) Heres a before and after example using a few static class members provided by 
a commonly used class in the Java API, j ava. lang . Integer. This example also uses a static member 
that youve used a thousand times, probably without ever giving it much thought; the out field in the 
System class. 

Before static imports: 

public class TestStatic { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.println(Integer.MAX_VALUE); 

System.out.println(Integer.toHexString(42)); 

} 

} 

After static imports: 


import static java.lang.System.out; // 1 

import static java.lang.Integer.*; // 2 

public class TestStaticImport { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

out.println(MAX_VALUE); // 3 

out.println(toHexString(42)); // 4 

} 

} 


Both classes produce the same output: 


2147483647 


2a 


Lets look at whats happening in the code thats using the static import feature: 

1. Even though the feature is commonly called static import, the syntax MUST be import 
static followed by the fully qualified name of the static member you want to import, or a 
wildcard. In this case, were doing a static import on the System class out object. 

2. In this case, we might want to use several of the static members of the java, lang. Integer 
class. This static import statement uses the wildcard to say, I want to do static imports of ALL the 
static members in this class. 

3. Now were finally seeing the benefit of the static import feature! We didnt have to type the 
System in System. out. println! Wow! Second, we didnt have to type the Integer in 
Integer . MAX_VALUE. So in this line of code we were able to use a shortcut for a static method 
AND a constant. 

4. Finally, we do one more shortcut, this time for a method in the Integer class. 

Weve been a little sarcastic about this feature, but were not the only ones. Were not convinced that 
saving a few keystrokes is worth possibly making the code a little harder to read, but enough developers 
requested it that it was added to the language. 

Here are a couple of rules for using static imports: 

 You must say import static; you cant say static import. 

I Watch out for ambiguously named static members. For instance, if you do a static import for 
both the Integer class and the Long class, referring to MAX_VALUE will cause a compiler error, 
because both Integer and Long have a MAX_VALUE constant and Java wont know which 
max_value youre referring to. 

 You can do a static import on static object references, constants (remember theyre static 
and final), and static methods. 



 a t c h 


As youve seen, when using import and import static statements, sometimes you can use the 
wildcard character * to do some simple searching for you. (You can search within a package or 
within a class.) As you saw earlier, if you want to "search through the java.util package for 
class names," you can say this: 

import java.util.*; // ok to search the java.util package 

In a similar vein, if you want to "search through the java.lang.Integer class for static 
members," you can say this: 

import static java.lang.Integer.*; // ok to search the 

// java.lang.Integer class 

But you cant create broader searches. For instance, you CANNOT use an import to search 





through the entire Java API: 

import java.*; // Legal, but this WILL NOT search across packages. 


Class Declarations and Modifiers 

The class declarations well discuss in this section are limited to top-level classes. In addition to top- 
level classes, Java provides for another category of class known as nested classes or inner classes. Inner 
classes are included on the OCP exam, but not the OCA exam. When you become an OCP candidate, 
youre going to love learning about inner classes. No, really. Seriously. 

The following code is a bare-bones class declaration: 

class MyClass { } 

This code compiles just fine, but you can also add modifiers before the class declaration. In general, 
modifiers fall into two categories: 

Access modifiers (public, protected, private) 
ft Nonaccess modifiers (including strictf p, final, and abstract) 

Well look at access modifiers first, so youll learn how to restrict or allow access to a class you 
create. Access control in Java is a little tricky because there are four access controls (levels of access) 
but only three access modifiers. The fourth access control level (called default or package access) is 
what you get when you dont use any of the three access modifiers. In other words, every class, method, 
and instance variable you declare has an access control, whether you explicidy type one or not. Although 
all four access controls (which means all three modifiers ) work for most method and variable 
declarations, a class can be declared with only public or default access; the other two access control 
levels dont make sense for a class, as youll see. 


0 w I h* 

Java is a package-centric language; the developers assumed that for good organization and name 
scoping, you would put all your classes into packages. They were right, and you should. Imagine this 
nightmare: Three different programmers, in the same company but working on different parts of a 
project, write a class named Utilities. If those three Utilities classes have not been declared in 
any explicit package and are in the classpath, you wont have any way to tell the compiler or JVM 
which of the three youre trying to reference. Oracle recommends that developers use reverse 
domain names, appended with division and/or project names. For example, if your domain name is 
geeksanonymous.com and youre working on the client code for the TwelvePointOSteps program, 
you would name your package something like com. geeksanonymous. steps. client. That would 
essentially change the name of your class to com. geeksanonymous. steps. client. Utilities. You 
might still have name collisions within your company if you dont come up with your own naming 
schemes, but youre guaranteed not to collide with classes developed outside your company 
(assuming they follow Oracles naming convention, and if they dont, well, Really Bad Things could 
happen). 





Class Access 


What does it mean to access a class? When we say code from one class (class A) has access to another 
class (class B), it means class A can do one of three things: 

 Create an instance of class B. 

 Extend class B (in other words, become a subclass of class B). 

 Access certain methods and variables within class B, depending on the access control of those 
methods and variables. 

In effect, access means visibility. If class A cant see class B, the access level of the methods and 
variables within class B wont matter; class A wont have any way to access those methods and 
variables. 

Default Access A class with default access has no modifier preceding it in the declaration! Its the 
access control you get when you dont type a modifier in the class declaration. Think of default access as 
package-level access, because a class with default access can be seen only by classes within the same 
package. For example, if class A and class B are in different packages, and class A has default access, 
class B wont be able to create an instance of class A or even declare a variable or return type of class A. 
In fact, class B has to pretend that class A doesnt even exist or the compiler will complain. Look at the 
following source file: 

package cert; 
class Beverage { } 

Now look at the second source file: 

package exam.stuf f; 

import cert.Beverage; 

class Tea extends Beverage { } 

As you can see, the superclass (Beverage) is in a different package from the subclass (Tea). The 
import statement at the top of the Tea file is trying (fingers crossed) to import the Beverage class. The 
Beverage file compiles fine, but when we try to compile the Tea file, we get something like this: 

Can't access class cert.Beverage. Class or interface must be public, in same 
package, or an accessible member class, 
import cert.Beverage; 

(Note: For various reasons, the error messages we show throughout this book might not match the 
error messages you get. Dont worry, the real point is to understand when youre apt to get an error 
of some sort.) 

Tea wont compile because its superclass, Beverage, has default access and is in a different package. 
You can do one of two things to make this work. You could put both classes in the same package, or you 
could declare Beverage as public, as the next section describes. 

When you see a question with complex logic, be sure to look at the access modifiers first. That way, if 
you spot an access violation (for example, a class in package A trying to access a default class in package 
B), youll know the code wont compile so you dont have to bother working through the logic. Its not as 
if you dont have anything better to do with your time while taking the exam Just choose the Compilation 
fails answer and zoom on to the next question. 


Public Access 


A class declaration with the public keyword gives all classes from all packages access to the public 
class. In other words, all classes in the Java Universe (JU) have access to a public class. Dont forget, 
though, that if a public class youre trying to use is in a different package from the class youre writing, 
youll still need to import the public class. 

In the example from the preceding section, we may not want to place the subclass in the same package 
as the superclass. To make the code work, we need to add the keyword public in front of the superclass 
(Beverage) declaration, as follows: 

package cert; 

public class Beverage { } 

This changes the Beverage class so it will be visible to all classes in all packages. The class can now 
be instantiated from all other classes, and any class is now free to subclass (extend from) itunless, that 
is, the class is also marked with the nonaccess modifier final. Read on. 

Other (Nonaccess) Class Modifiers 

You can modify a class declaration using the keyword final, abstract, or strictfp. These modifiers 
are in addition to whatever access control is on the class, so you could, for example, declare a class as 
both public and final. But you cant always mix nonaccess modifiers. Youre free to use strictfp in 
combination with final, for example, but you must never, ever, ever mark a class as both final and 
abstract. Youll see why in the next two sections. 

You wont need to know how strictfp works, so were focusing only on modifying a class as final 
or abstract. For the exam, you need to know only that strictfp is a keyword and can be used to modify 
a class or a method, but never a variable. Marking a class as strictfp means that any method code in the 
class will conform stricdy to the IEEE 754 standard rules for floating points. Without that modifier, 
floating points used in the methods might behave in a platform-dependent way. If you dont declare a class 
as strictfp, you can still get strictfp behavior on a method-by-method basis by declaring a method as 
strictfp. If you dont know the IEEE 754 standard, nows not the time to learn it. You have, as they say, 
bigger fish to fry. 

Final Classes 

When used in a class declaration, the final keyword means the class cant be subclassed. In other 
words, no other class can ever extend (inherit from) a final class, and any attempts to do so will result 
in a compiler error. 

So why would you ever mark a class final? After all, doesnt that violate the whole OO notion of 
inheritance? You should make a final class only if you need an absolute guarantee that none of the 
methods in that class will ever be overridden. If youre deeply dependent on the implementations of 
certain methods, then using final gives you the security that nobody can change the implementation out 
from under you. 

Youll notice many classes in the Java core libraries are final. For example, the string class cannot 
be subclassed. Imagine the havoc if you couldnt guarantee how a St ring object would work on any 
given system your application is running on! If programmers were free to extend the string class (and 
thus substitute their new string subclass instances where java. lang. string instances are expected), 
civilizationas we know itcould collapse. So use final for safety, but only when youre certain that 



your final class has indeed said all that ever needs to be said in its methods. Marking a class final 
means, in essence, your class cant ever be improved upon, or even specialized, by another programmer. 

Theres a benefit to having nonfinal classes in this scenario: Imagine that you find a problem with a 
method in a class youre using, but you dont have the source code. So you cant modify the source to 
improve the method, but you can extend the class and override the method in your new subclass and 
substitute the subclass everywhere the original superclass is expected. If the class is final, though, 
youre stuck. 

Lets modify our Beverage example by placing the keyword final in the declaration: 

package cert; 

public final class Beverage { 

public void importantMethod() { } 

} 

Now lets try to compile the Tea subclass: 

package exam.stuff; 

import cert.Beverage; 

class Tea extends Beverage { } 

We get an errorsomething like this: 

Can't subclass final classes: class 

cert.Beverage class Tea extends Beverage{ 

1 error 

In practice, youll almost never make a final class. A final class obliterates a key benefit of OO 
extensibility. Unless you have a serious safety or security issue, assume that someday another programmer 
will need to extend your class. If you dont, the next programmer forced to maintain your code will hunt 
you down and <insert really scary thing>. 

Abstract Classes An abstract class can never be instantiated. Its sole purpose, mission in life, 
raison detre, is to be extended (subclassed). (Note, however, that you can compile and execute an 
abstract class, as long as you dont try to make an instance of it.) Why make a class if you cant make 
objects out of it? Because the class might be just too, well, abstract. For example, imagine you have a 
class Car that has generic methods common to all vehicles. But you dont want anyone actually creating a 
generic abstract Car object. How would they initialize its state? What color would it be? How many 
seats? Horsepower? All-wheel drive? Or more importantly, how would it behave? In other words, how 
would the methods be implemented? 

No, you need programmers to instantiate actual car types such as BMWBoxster and SubaruOutback. 
Well bet the Boxster owner will tell you his car does things the Subaru can do only in its dreams. Take 
a look at the following abstract class: 


abstract class Car { 

private double price; 

private String model; 

private String year; 

public abstract void goFastO; 

public abstract void goUpHillO; 

public abstract void impressNeighbors(); 

// Additional, important, and serious code goes here 

} 

The preceding code will compile fine. However, if you try to instantiate a Car in another body of code, 
youll get a compiler error something like this: 

AnotherClass.java:7: class Car is an abstract 
class. It can't be instantiated. 

Car x = new Car() ; 

1 error 

Notice that the methods marked abstract end in a semicolon rather than curly braces. 

Look for questions with a method declaration that ends with a semicolon, rather than curly braces. If 
the method is in a classas opposed to an interfacethen both the method and the class must be marked 
abstract. You might get a question that asks how you could fix a code sample that includes a method 
ending in a semicolon but without an abstract modifier on the class or method. In that case, you could 
either mark the method and class abstract or change the semicolon to code (like a curly brace pair). 
Remember that if you change a method from abstract to nonabstract, dont forget to change the 
semicolon at the end of the method declaration into a curly brace pair! 

Well look at abstract methods in more detail later in this objective, but always remember that if 
evena single method is abstract, the whole class must be declared abstract. One abstract method 
spoils the whole bunch. You can, however, put nonabstract methods in an abstract class. For example, 
you might have methods with implementations that shouldnt change from Car type to Car type, such as 
getColor( ) or setPrice( ). By putting nonabstract methods in an abstract class, you give all concrete 
subclasses (concrete just means not abstract) inherited method implementations. The good news there is 
that concrete subclasses get to inherit functionality and need to implement only the methods that define 
subclass-specific behavior. 

(By the way, if you think we misused raison detre earlier, dont send an e-mail. Wed like to see you 
work it into a programmer certification book.) 

Coding with abstract class types (including interfaces, discussed later in this chapter) lets you take 
advantage of polymorphism and gives you the greatest degree of flexibility and extensibility. Youll learn 
more about polymorphism in Chapter 2. 

You cant mark a class as both abstract and final. They have nearly opposite meanings. An 
abstract class must be subclassed, whereas a final class must not be subclassed. If you see this 
combination of abstract and final modifiers used for a class or method declaration, the code will not 
compile. 


EXERCISE 1-1 


Creating an Abstract Superclass and Concrete Subclass 

The following exercise will test your knowledge of public, default, final, and abstract classes. 





Create an abstract superclass named Fruit and a concrete subclass named Apple. The superclass 
should belong to a package called food and the subclass can belong to the default package (meaning it 
isnt put into a package explicidy). Make the superclass public and give the subclass default access. 

1. Create the superclass as follows: 
package food; 

public abstract class Fruit{ /* any code you want */} 

2. Create the subclass in a separate file as follows: 
import food.Fruit; 

class Apple extends Fruit{ /* any code you want */} 


3. Create a directory called food off the directory in your class path setting. 

4. Attempt to compile the two files. If you want to use the Apple class, make sure you place the 
Fruit .class file in the food subdirectory. 

i- \ 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Use Interfaces (OCA Objective 7.5) 

7.6 Use abstract classes and interfaces. 

Declaring an Interface 

In general, when you create an interface, youre defining a contract for what a class can do, without 
saying anything about how the class will do it. 

Note: As of Java 8, you can now also describe the how, but you usually wont. Until we get to the new 
interface-related features of Java 8 default and static methodswe will discuss interfaces from a 
traditional perspective, which is again, defining a contract for what a class can do. 

An interface is a contract. You could write an interface Bounceable, for example, that says in effect, 
This is the Bounceable interface. Any concrete class type that implements this interface must agree to 
write the code for the bounce () and setBounceFactor () methods. 

By defining an interface for Bounceable, any class that wants to be treated as a Bounceable thing can 
simply implement the Bounceable interface and provide code for the interfaces two methods. 

Interfaces can be implemented by any class, from any inheritance tree. This lets you take radically 
different classes and give them a common characteristic. For example, you might want both a Ball and a 
Tire to have bounce behavior, but Ball and Tire dont share any inheritance relationship; Ball extends 
Toy while Tire extends only java, lang .Object. But by making both Ball and Tire implement 
Bounceable, youre saying that Ball and Tire can be treated as Things that can bounce, which in Java 
translates to, Things on which you can invoke the bounce () and setBounceFactor () methods. Figure 
1-1 illustrates the relationship between interfaces and classes. 





What you 
declare. 


interface Bounceable 


void bounce( ); 

void setBounceFactor(int bf); 


interface Bounceable 


public abstract void bounce( ); 

public abstract void setBounceFactor(int bf); 

-z- 

i 


What the 

compiler 

sees. 


Class Tire implements Bounceable 

public void bounce( ){...} 

public void setBounceFactor(int bf){ } 


FIGURE 1-1 


The relationship between interfaces and classes 


What the 
implementing 
class must do. 

(All interface 
methods must 
be implemented 
and must be 
marked public.) 


Think of a traditional interface as a 100 percent abstract class. Like an abstract class, an interface 
defines abstract methods that take the following form: 

abstract void bounce(); // Ends with a semicolon rather than 

// curly braces 

But although an abstract class can define both abstract and nonabstract methods, an interface 
generally has only abstract methods. Another way interfaces differ from abstract classes is that 
interfaces have very little flexibility in how the methods and variables defined in the interface are 
declared. These rules are strict: 

 Interface methods are implicitly public and abstract, unless declared as default or 
static. In other words, you do not need to actually type the public or abstract modifiers in the 
method declaration, but the method is still always public and abstract. 

 All variables defined in an interface must be public, static, and finalin other words, 








interfaces can declare only constants, not instance variables. 

 Interface methods cannot be marked final, strictfp, or native. (More on these modifiers 
later in the chapter.) 

i An interface can extend one or more other interfaces. 

I An interface cannot extend anything but another interface. 

I An interface cannot implement another interface or class. 

I An interface must be declared with the keyword interface. 

 Interface types can be used polymorphically (see Chapter 2 for more details). 

The following is a legal interface declaration: 

public abstract interface Rollable { } 

Typing in the abstract modifier is considered redundant; interfaces are implicidy abstract whether 
you type abstract or not. You just need to know that both of these declarations are legal and functionally 
identical: 

public abstract interface Rollable { } 
public interface Rollable { } 

The public modifier is required if you want the interface to have public rather than default access. 

Weve looked at the interface declaration, but now well look closely at the methods within an 
interface: 

public interface Bounceable { 

public abstract void bounce(); 

public abstract void setBounceFactor(int bf); 

} 

Typing in the public and abstract modifiers on the methods is redundant, though, since all interface 
methods are implicidy public and abstract. Given that rule, you can see that the following code is 
exacdy equivalent to the preceding interface: 

public interface Bounceable { 

void bounce(); // No modifiers 

void setBounceFactor(int bf); // No modifiers 

} 


You must remember that all interface methods not declared default or static are public and 
abstract regardless of what you see in the interface definition. 

Look for interface methods declared with any combination of public, abstract, or no modifiers. For 
example, the following five method declarations, if declared within their own interfaces, are legal and 
identical! 

void bounce(); 
public void bounce(); 
abstract void bounce(); 
public abstract void bounce(); 
abstract public void bounce(); 


The following interface method declarations wont compile: 

final void bounce(); // final and abstract can never be used 

// together, and abstract is implied 
private void bounce(); // interface methods are always public 

protected void bounced ; // (same as above) 

Declaring Interface Constants 

Youre allowed to put constants in an interface. By doing so, you guarantee that any class implementing 
the interface will have access to the same constant. By placing the constants right in the interface, any 
class that implements the interface has direct access to the constants, just as if the class had inherited 
them. 

You need to remember one key rule for interface constants. They must always be 
public static final 

So that sounds simple, right? After all, interface constants are no different from any other publicly 
accessible constants, so they obviously must be declared public, static, and final. But before you 
breeze past the rest of this discussion, think about the implications: Because interface constants are 
defined in an interface, they dont have to be declared as public, static, or final. They must be 
public, static, and final, but you dont actually have to declare them that way. Just as interface 
methods are always public and abstract whether you say so in the code or not, any variable defined in 
an interface must beand implicidy isa public constant. See if you can spot the problem with the 
following code (assume two separate files): 

interface Foo { 
int BAR = 42; 
void go(); 

} 

class Zap implements Foo { 
public void go() { 

BAR = 27; 

} 

} 

You cant change the value of a constant! Once the value has been assigned, the value can never be 
modified. The assignment happens in the interface itself (where the constant is declared), so the 
implementing class can access it and use it, but as a read-only value. So the bar = 27 assignment will 
not compile. 



 a t c h 


Look for interface definitions that define constants , but without explicitly using the required 
modifiers. For example , the following are all identical: 






public int x = 1; 

int x = 1; 

static int x = 1; 
final int x = 1; 
public static int x = 1; 
public final int x = 1; 
static final int x = 1; 
public static final int x = 1; 


// Looks non-static and non-final, 
// but isn 1 t! 

// Looks default, non-final, 

// non-static, but isn't! 

// Doesn't show final or public 
// Doesn't show static or public 
// Doesn't show final 
// Doesn't show static 
// Doesn't show public 
// what you get implicitly 


Any combination of the required (but implicit) modifiers is legal, as is using no modifiers at 
all! On the exam, you can expect to see questions you wont be able to answer correctly unless 
you know, for example, that an interface variable is final and can never be given a value by the 
implementing (or any other) class. 


Declaring default Interface Methods 

As of Java 8, interfaces can include inheritable* methods with concrete implementations. (*The strict 
definition of inheritance has gotten a little fuzzy with Java 8; well talk more about inheritance in 
Chapter 2.) These concrete methods are called default methods. In the next chapter well talk a lot about 
the various OO-related rules that are impacted because of default methods. For now well just cover the 
simple declaration rules: 

 default methods are declared by using the default keyword. The default keyword can be 
used only with interface method signatures, not class method signatures. 

 default methods are public by definition, and the public modifier is optional. 

 default methods cannot be marked as private, protected, static, final, or abstract. 

 default methods must have a concrete method body. 

Here are some examples of legal and illegal default methods: 

interface TestDefault { 

default int ml(){return 1;} // legal 
public default void m2(){;} // legal 

static default void m3(){;} // illegal: default cannot be marked static 
default void m4(); // illegal: default must have a method body 

} 

Declaring static Interface Methods 

As of Java 8, interfaces can include static methods with concrete implementations. As with interface 
default methods, there are OO implications that well discuss in Chapter 2. For now, well focus on the 
basics of declaring and using static interface methods: 


 static interface methods are declared by using the static keyword. 





 static interface methods are public by default, and the public modifier is optional. 

 static interface methods cannot be marked as private, protected, final, or abstract, 
static interface methods must have a concrete method body. 

When invoking a static interface method, the methods type (interface name) MUST be 
included in the invocation. 


Here are some examples of legal and illegal static interface methods and their use: 

interface Staticlface { 

static int ml(){ return 42; } 

public static void m2(){ ; } 

// final static void m3(){ ; } 

// abstract static void m4(){ ; } 

// static void m5(); 

} 

public class TestSIF implements Staticlface { 
public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.println(Staticlface.ml()); // legal: ml()'s type 

// must be included 

new TestSIF().go(); 

// System.out.println(ml()); // illegal: reference to interface 

//is required 

} 

void go() { 

System.out.println(Staticlface.ml()) ; // also legal from an instance 

} 

} 

which produces this output: 

42 

42 


// legal 
// legal 

// illegal: final not allowed 
// illegal: abstract not allowed 
// illegal: needs a method body 


As we said earlier, well return to our discussion of default methods and static methods for interfaces 
in Chapter 2. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Declare Class Members (OCA Objectives 2.1, 2.2, 2.3,4.1, 
4.2, 6.2, 6.3, and 6.4) 

2.1 Declare and initialize variables (including casting of primitive data types). 

2.2 Differentiate between object reference variables and primitive variables. 

2.3 Know how to read or write to object fields. 

4.1 Declare, instantiate, initialize, and use a one-dimensional array. 

4.2 Declare, instantiate, initialize, and use multidimensional array, (sic) 

6.2 Apply the static keyword to methods and fields. 

6.3 Create and overload constructors; including impact on default constructors, (sic) 




6.4 Apply access modifiers. 


Weve looked at what it means to use a modifier in a class declaration, and now well look at what it 
means to modify a method or variable declaration. 

Methods and instance (nonlocal) variables are collectively known as members. You can modify a 
member with both access and nonaccess modifiers, and you have more modifiers to choose from (and 
combine) than when youre declaring a class. 


Access Modifiers 

Because method and variable members are usually given access control in exacdy the same way, well 
cover both in this section. 

Whereas a class can use just two of the four access control levels (default or public), members can 
use all four: 

 public 

 protected 
default 
private 

Default protection is what you get when you dont type an access modifier in the member declaration. 
The default and protected access control types have almost identical behavior, except for one difference 
that we will mention later. 

Note: As of Java 8, the word default can ALSO be used to declare certain methods in interfaces. 
When used in an interfaces method declaration, default has a different meaning than what we are 
describing for the rest of this chapter. 

Its crucial that you know access control inside and outside for the exam There will be quite a few 
questions where access control plays a role. Some questions test several concepts of access control at the 
same time, so not knowing one small part of access control could mean you blow an entire question. 

What does it mean for code in one class to have access to a member of another class? For now, ignore 
any differences between methods and variables. If class A has access to a member of class B, it means 
that class Bs member is visible to class A. When a class does not have access to another member, the 
compiler will slap you for trying to access something that youre not even supposed to know exists! 

You need to understand two different access issues: 

i Whether method code in one class can access a member of another class 

i Whether a subclass can inherit a member of its superclass 

The first type of access occurs when a method in one class tries to access a method or a variable of 
another class, using the dot operator (.) to invoke a method or retrieve a variable. For example: 


class Zoo { 

public String coolMethod() { 

return "Wow baby"; 

} 

} 

class Moo { 

public void useAZooO { 

Zoo z = new Zoo(); 

// If the preceding line compiles Moo has access 
// to the Zoo class 

// But... does it have access to the coolMethod()? 

System.out.printIn("A Zoo says, " + z.coolMethod()); 

// The preceding line works because Moo can access the 
// public method 

} 

} 

The second type of access revolves around which, if any, members of a superclass a subclass can 
access through inheritance. Were not looking at whether the subclass can, say, invoke a method on an 
instance of the superclass (which would just be an example of the first type of access). Instead, were 
looking at whether the subclass inherits a member of its superclass. Remember, if a subclass inherits a 
member, its exacdy as if the subclass actually declared the member itself. In other words, if a subclass 
inherits a member, the subclass has the member. Heres an example: 

class Zoo { 

public String coolMethod() { 

return "Wow baby"; 

} 

} 

class Moo extends Zoo { 

public void useMyCoolMethod() { 

// Does an instance of Moo inherit the coolMethod()? 

System.out.printIn("Moo says, " + this.coolMethod()); 

// The preceding line works because Moo can inherit the 
// public method 

// Can an instance of Moo invoke coolMethod() on an 
// instance of Zoo? 

Zoo z = new Zoo(); 

System.out.printIn("Zoo says, " + z.coolMethod()); 

// coolMethod() is public, so Moo can invoke it on a Zoo 
// reference 

} 

} 

Figure 1-2 compares a class inheriting a member of another class and accessing a member of another 
class using a reference of an instance of that class. 


SportsCar 



goFast( ){ } 
doStuff( ){ 
goFast( ); 

} 

-x- 


superclass 


Convertible 



doThings( ){ 

SportsCar sc = new SportsCar( ); 
sc.goFast( ); 

} 

doMore( ){ 
goFast( ); 

} 


subclass 



Driver 



doDriverStuf f( 

) { 

 

SportsCar car = 
car.goFast( ); 

new SportsCar( ); 

 

Convertible con 

= new Convertible( ); 

con.goFast( ); 

} 



Three ways to access a method: 

@ Invoking a method declared in the same class 
(r) Invoking a method using a reference of the class 
Invoking an inherited method 


FIGURE 1-2 


Comparison of inheritance vs. dot operator for member access 


Much of access control (both types) centers on whether the two classes involved are in the same or 
different packages. Dont forget, though, that if class A itself cant be accessed by class B, then no 
members within class A can be accessed by class B. 

You need to know the effect of different combinations of class and member access (such as a default 
class with a public variable). To figure this out, first look at the access level of the class. If the class 
itself will not be visible to another class, then none of the members will be visible either, even if the 
member is declared public. Once youve confirmed that the class is visible, then it makes sense to look 
at access levels on individual members. 


Public Members 

When a method or variable member is declared public, it means all other classes, regardless of the 
package they belong to, can access the member (assuming the class itself is visible). 

Look at the following source file: 










package book; 

import cert.*; // Import all classes in the cert package 
class Goo { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Sludge o = new Sludge(); 
o.testlt() ; 

} 

} 

Now look at the second file: 

package cert; 
public class Sludge { 

public void testltO { System.out.printIn("sludge"); } 

} 

As you can see, Goo and Sludge are in different packages. However, Goo can invoke the method in 
Sludge without problems because both the Sludge class and its testlt () method are marked public. 

For a subclass, if a member of its superclass is declared public, the subclass inherits that member 
regardless of whether both classes are in the same package: 

package cert; 
public class Roo { 

public String doRooThings() { 

// imagine the fun code that goes here 
return "fun"; 

} 

} 

The Roo class declares the doRooThings () member as public. So if we make a subclass of Roo, any 
code in that Roo subclass can call its own inherited doRooThings () method. 

Notice in the following code that the doRooThings () method is invoked without having to preface it 
with a reference: 

package notcert; // Not the package Roo is in 

import cert.Roo; 

class Cloo extends Roo { 

public void testClooO { 

System.out.printIn(doRooThings()); 

} 

} 

Remember, if you see a method invoked (or a variable accessed) without the dot operator (.), it means 
the method or variable belongs to the class where you see that code. It also means that the method or 
variable is implicitly being accessed using the this reference. So in the preceding code, the call to 
doRooThings () in the Cloo class could also have been written as this. doRooThings (). The reference 
this always refers to the currently executing objectin other words, the object running the code where 
you see the this reference. Because the this reference is implicit, you dont need to preface your 
member access code with it, but it wont hurt. Some programmers include it to make the code easier to 
read for new (or non) Java programmers. 

Besides being able to invoke the doRooThings () method on itself, code from some other class can 
call doRooThings () on a Cloo instance, as in the following: 


{ 


package notcert; 
class Toon { 

public static void main(String[] args) 
Cloo c = new Cloo(); 

System.out.printIn(c.doRooThings()); 


} 


} 


// No problem; method 
// is public 


Private Members 

Members marked private cant be accessed by code in any class other than the class in which the 
private member was declared. Lets make a small change to the Roo class from an earlier example: 

package cert; 
public class Roo { 

private String doRooThings() { 

// imagine the fun code that goes here, but only the Roo 
// class knows 
return "fun"; 

} 

} 

The doRooThings () method is now private, so no other class can use it. If we try to invoke the 
method from any other class, well run into trouble: 

package notcert; 
import cert.Roo; 
class UseARoo { 

public void testltO { 

Roo r = new Roo(); //So far so good; class Roo is public 
System.out.printIn(r.doRooThings()); // Compiler error! 

} 

} 

If we try to compile UseARoo, we get a compiler error something like this: 

cannot find symbol 
symbol : method doRooThings() 

Its as if the method doRooThings () doesnt exist, and as far as any code outside of the Roo class is 
concerned, this is true. A private member is invisible to any code outside the members own class. 

What about a subclass that tries to inherit a private member of its superclass? When a member is 
declared private, a subclass cant inherit it. For the exam, you need to recognize that a subclass cant 
see, use, or even think about the private members of its superclass. You can, however, declare a 
matching method in the subclass. But regardless of how it looks, it is not an overriding method! It is 
simply a method that happens to have the same name as a private method (which youre not supposed to 
know about) in the superclass. The rules of overriding do not apply, so you can make this newly- 
declared-but-just-happens-to-match method declare new exceptions, or change the return type, or do 
anything else you want it to do. 


package cert; 
public class Roo { 

private String doRooThings() { 

// imagine the fun code that goes here, but no other class 
// will know 
return "fun"; 

} 

} 

The doRooThings () method is now off limits to all subclasses, even those in the same package as the 
superclass: 

package cert; // Cloo and Roo are in the same package 

class Cloo extends Roo { // Still OK, superclass Roo is public 

public void testCloo() { 

System.out.printIn(doRooThings()); // Compiler error! 

} 

} 

If we try to compile the subclass cloo, the compiler is delighted to spit out an error something like 
this: 


%javac Cloo.java 

Cloo.java:4: Undefined method: doRooThings() 

System.out.println(doRooThings()); 

1 error 

Can a private method be overridden by a subclass? Thats an interesting question, but the answer is 
no. Because the subclass, as weve seen, cannot inherit a private method, it, therefore, cannot override 
the methodoverriding depends on inheritance. Well cover the implications of this in more detail a little 
later in this section as well as in Chapter 2, but for now, just remember that a method marked private 
cannot be overridden. Figure 1-3 illustrates the effects of the public and private modifiers on classes 
from the same or different packages. 


The effect of private access control 



Driver 

doI^Xive^Stuf f ( ) { 

SporesCar car = new SportsCar( ); 
ca^fgoFast( ) ; 

Convertible con = new Convertible( ); 
con^pFast ( ) ; 

} 


Three ways to access a method: 

( d ) Invoking a method declared in the same class 
(r) Invoking a method using a reference of the class 
(T) Invoking an inherited method 


FIGURE 1-3 


Effects of public and private access 


Protected and Default Members 

Note: Just a reminder, in the next several sections, when we use the word default, were talking about 
access control. Were NOT talking about the new kind of Java 8 interface method that can be declared 
default. 

The protected and default access control levels are almost identical, but with one critical difference. 
A default member may be accessed only if the class accessing the member belongs to the same package, 
whereas a protected member can be accessed (through inheritance) by a subclass even if the subclass 
is in a different package. Take a look at the following two classes: 












package certification; 
public class OtherClass { 

void testltO { // No modifier means method has default 

// access 

System.out.println("OtherClass"); 

} 

} 

In another source code file you have the following: 

package somethingElse; 

import certification.OtherClass; 

class AccessClass { 

static public void main(String[] args) { 

OtherClass o = new OtherClass(); 
o.testlt() ; 

}} 

As you can see, the testlt () method in the first file has default (thinkpackage-level) access. Notice 
also that class OtherClass is in a different package from the AccessClass. Will AccessClass be able 
to use the method testlt ()? Will it cause a compiler error? Will Daniel ever marry Francesca? Stay 
tuned. 


No method matching testlt() found in class 

certification.OtherClass. o.testlt(); 

From the preceding results, you can see that AccessClass cant use the OtherClass method 
testlt () because testlt () has default access and AccessClass is not in the same package as 
OtherClass. So AccessClass cant see it, the compiler complains, and we have no idea who Daniel and 
Francesca are. 

Default and protected behavior differ only when we talk about subclasses. If the protected keyword 
is used to define a member, any subclass of the class declaring the member can access it through 
inheritance. It doesnt matter if the superclass and subclass are in different packages; the protected 
superclass member is still visible to the subclass (although visible only in a very specific way, as well 
see a little later). This is in contrast to the default behavior, which doesnt allow a subclass to access a 
superclass member unless the subclass is in the same package as the superclass. 

Whereas default access doesnt extend any special consideration to subclasses (youre either in the 
package or youre not), the protected modifier respects the parent-child relationship, even when the 
child class moves away (and joins a new package). So when you think of default access, think package 
restriction. No exceptions. But when you think protected, think package + kids. A class with a 
protected member is marking that member as having package-level access for all classes, but with a 
special exception for subclasses outside the package. 

But what does it mean for a subclass-outside-the-package to have access to a superclass (parent) 
member? It means the subclass inherits the member. It does not, however, mean the subclass-outside-the- 
package can access the member using a reference to an instance of the superclass. In other words, 
protected = inheritance. Protected does not mean that the subclass can treat the protected superclass 
member as though it were public. So if the subclass-outside-the-package gets a reference to the superclass 
(by, for example, creating an instance of the superclass somewhere in the subclasss code), the subclass 
cannot use the dot operator on the superclass reference to access the protected member. To a subclass- 
outside-the-package, a protected member might as well be default (or even private), when the 


subclass is using a reference to the superclass. The subclass can see the protected member only 
through inheritance. 

Are you confused? Hang in there and it will all become clearer with the next batch of code examples. 

Protected Details 

Lets take a look at a protected instance variable (remember, an instance variable is a member) of a 
superclass. 

package certification; 
public class Parent { 

protected int x = 9; // protected access 

} 

The preceding code declares the variable x as protected. This makes the variable accessible to all 
other classes inside the certification package, as well as inheritable by any subclasses outside the 
package. 

Now lets create a subclass in a different package and attempt to use the variable x (that the subclass 
inherits): 

package other; 

import certification.Parent; 
class Child extends Parent { 
public void testltO { 

System.out.println("x is 

} 

} 

The preceding code compiles fine. Notice, though, that the Child class is accessing the protected 
variable through inheritance. Remember that any time we talk about a subclass having access to a 
superclass member, we could be talking about the subclass inheriting the member, not simply accessing 
the member through a reference to an instance of the superclass (the way any other nonsubclass would 
access it). Watch what happens if the subclass child (outside the superclasss package) tries to access a 
protected variable using a Parent class reference: 

package other; 

import certification.Parent; 
class Child extends Parent { 
public void testltO { 

System.out.println("x is " + x) ; 

Parent p = new Parent(); 

System.out.println("X in parent is 

} 

} 

The compiler is more than happy to show us the problem: 


// No problem; Child 
// inherits x 
// Can we access x using 
// the p reference? 

+ p.x); // Compiler error! 


// Different package 


+ x); // No problem; Child 
// inherits x 


%javac -d . other/Child.java 

other/Child.java:9: x has protected access in certification.Parent 
System.out.println("X in parent is " + p.x); 

A 

1 error 

So far, weve established that a protected member has essentially package-level or default access to 
all classes except for subclasses. Weve seen that subclasses outside the package can inherit a protected 
member. Finally, weve seen that subclasses outside the package cant use a superclass reference to 
access a protected member. For a subclass outside the package, the protected member can be 
accessed only through inheritance. 

But theres still one more issue we havent looked at: What does a protected member look like to 
other classes trying to use the subclass-outside-the-package to get to the subclasss inherited protected 
superclass member? For example, using our previous Parent/Child classes, what happens if some other 
class Neighbor, sayin the same package as the Child (subclass) has a reference to a Child instance 
and wants to access the member variable x? In other words, how does that protected member behave 
once the subclass has inherited it? Does it maintain its protected status such that classes in the Childs 
package can see it? 

No! Once the subclass-outside-the-package inherits the protected member, that member (as inherited 
by the subclass) becomes private to any code outside the subclass, with the exception of subclasses of the 
subclass. So if class Neighbor instantiates a Child object, then even if class Neighbor is in the same 
package as class Child, class Neighbor wont have access to the Childs inherited (but protected) 
variable x. Figure 1-4 illustrates the effect of protected access on classes and subclasses in the same or 
different packages. 

Whew! That wraps up protected, the most misunderstood modifier in Java. Again, its used only in 
very special cases, but you can count on it showing up on the exam Now that weve covered the 
protected modifier, well switch to default member access, a piece of cake compared to protected. 


If goFast( ) is default 


Package A 



Driver 


  


Key: 


Package A 


SportsCar 


goFast( ){ } 

t 


Convertible 


  


Package A 


SportsCar 


goFast( ){ } 

 



Package B 

Convertible 


Driver 

\ 

 

f \ 

 


If goFast( ) is protected 


Package A 


SportsCar 


protected goFast( ){ } 

 


Convertible 

\ 

 

:  


Driver 

 

;  

/ 


 







goFast( ) { } 
doStuff ( ){ 
goFast( ); 

} 

 

doThings( ) { 

SportsCar sc = new SportsCar( ); 
sc.goFast( ); 

} 

 

doMore( ){ 
goFast( ); 

} 

Where goFast 
is Declared in the 
same class. 


Invoking goFast ( ) using a Reference to the 
class in which goFast ( ) was declared. 


Invoking the 
goFast( ) 
method 

Inherited from 


FIGURE 1-4 


Effects of protected access 


Default Details 

Lets start with the default behavior of a member in a superclass. Well modify the Parents member x to 
make it default. 

package certification; 
public class Parent { 

int x = 9; //No access modifier, means default 
// (package) access 

} 

Notice we didnt place an access modifier in front of the variable x. Remember that if you dont type 
an access modifier before a class or member declaration, the access control is default, which means 
package level. Well now attempt to access the default member from the child class that we saw earlier. 
When we try to compile the Child . j ava file, we get an error like this: 

















































































Child.java:4: Undefined variable: x 

System.out.println("Variable x is " + x); 

1 error 

The compiler gives the same error as when a member is declared as private. The subclass Child (in a 
different package from the superclass Parent) cant see or use the default superclass member x! Now, 
what about default access for two classes in the same package? 

package certification; 
public class Parent{ 

int x = 9; // default access 

} 

And in the second class you have the following: 

package certification; 
class Child extends Parent{ 

static public void main(String[] args) { 

Child sc = new Child (); 
sc.testlt () ; 

} 

public void testlt () { 

System.out.println("Variable x is " + x); // No problem; 

} 

} 

The preceding source file compiles fine, and the class child runs and displays the value of x. Just 
remember that default members are visible to subclasses only if those subclasses are in the same package 
as the superclass. 

Local Variables and Access Modifiers 

Can access modifiers be applied to local variables? NO! 

There is never a case where an access modifier can be applied to a local variable, so watch out for 
code like the following: 

class Foo { 

void doStuffO { 

private int x = 7; 
this.doMore(x); 

} 

} 

You can be certain that any local variable declared with an access modifier will not compile. In fact, 
there is only one modifier that can ever be applied to local variablesfinal. 

That about does it for our discussion on member access modifiers. Table 1-2 shows all the 
combinations of access and visibility; you really should spend some time with it. Next, were going to dig 
into the other (nonaccess) modifiers that you can apply to member declarations. 


TABLE 1-2 


Determining Access to Class Members 



Visibility 

Public 

Protected 

Default 

Private 

From the same class 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

From any class in the same package 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

From a subclass in the same package 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

From a subclass outside the same package 

Yes 

Yes, through 
inheritance 

No 

No 

From any nonsubclass class outside the package 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 


Nonaccess Member Modifiers 

Weve discussed member access, which refers to whether code from one class can invoke a method (or 
access an instance variable) from another class. That still leaves a boadoad of other modifiers you can 
use on member declarations. Two youre already familiar with final and abstract because we 
applied them to class declarations earlier in this chapter. But we still have to take a quick look at 
transient, synchronized, native, strictf p, and then a long look at the Big One, static, much later 
in the chapter. 

Well look first at modifiers applied to methods, followed by a look at modifiers applied to instance 
variables. Well wrap up this section with a look at how static works when applied to variables and 
methods. 

Final Methods 

The final keyword prevents a method from being overridden in a subclass and is often used to enforce 
the API functionality of a method. For example, the Thread class has a method called isAlive( ) that 
checks whether a thread is still active. If you extend the Thread class, though, there is really no way that 
you can correcdy implement this method yourself (it uses native code, for one thing), so the designers 
have made it final. Just as you cant subclass the string class (because we need to be able to trust in 
the behavior of a String object), you cant override many of the methods in the core class libraries. This 
cant-be-overridden restriction provides for safety and security, but you should use it with great caution. 
Preventing a subclass from overriding a method stifles many of the benefits of OO, including extensibility 
through polymorphism. Atypical final method declaration looks like this: 

class Superclass! 

public final void showSampleO { 

System.out.println("One thing."); 

} 

} 

Its legal to extend Superclass, since the class isnt marked final, but we cant override the final 
method showSample( ), as the following code attempts to do: 










class Subclass extends Superclass! 

public void showSampleO { // Try to override the final 

// superclass method 
System.out.printIn("Another thing."); 

} 

} 

Attempting to compile the preceding code gives us something like this: 

%j avac FinalTest.j ava 

FinalTest.java:5: The method void showSampleO declared in class 
Subclass cannot override the final method of the same signature 
declared in class Superclass. 

Final methods cannot be overridden. 

public void showSampleO { } 

1 error 

Final Arguments 

Method arguments are the variable declarations that appear in between the parentheses in a method 
declaration. Atypical method declaration with multiple arguments looks like this: 

public Record getRecord(int fileNumber, int recNumber) {} 

Method arguments are essentially the same as local variables. In the preceding example, the variables 
fileNumber and recNumber will both follow all the rules applied to local variables. This means they 
can also have the modifier final: 

public Record getRecord(int fileNumber, final int recNumber) {} 

In this example, the variable recNumber is declared as final, which, of course, means it cant be 
modified within the method. In this case, modified means reassigning a new value to the variable. In 
other words, a final parameter must keep the same value as the argument had when it was passed into 
the method. 

Abstract Methods 

An abstract method is a method thats been declared (as abstract) but not implemented. In other 
words, the method contains no functional code. And if you recall from the earlier section Abstract 
Classes, an abstract method declaration doesnt even have curly braces for where the implementation 
code goes, but instead closes with a semicolon. In other words, it has no method body. You mark a 
method abstract when you want to force subclasses to provide the implementation. For example, if you 
write an abstract class Car with a method gol)pHill( ), you might want to force each subtype of Car to 
define its own gol)pHill() behavior, specific to that particular type of car. 

public abstract void showSampleO; 

Notice that the abstract method ends with a semicolon instead of curly braces. It is illegal to have 
even a single abstract method in a class that is not explicitly declared abstract! Look at the 
following illegal class: 


public class IllegalClass{ 

public abstract void doIt(); 

} 

The preceding class will produce the following error if you try to compile it: 

IllegalClass.java:1: class IllegalClass must be declared 
abstract. 

It does not define void doIt() from class IllegalClass. 
public class IllegalClass{ 

1 error 

You can, however, have an abstract class with no abstract methods. The following example will 
compile fine: 

public abstract class LegalClass{ 

void goodMethod() { 

// lots of real implementation code here 

} 

} 

In the preceding example, goodMethod () is not abstract. Three different clues tell you its notan 
abstract method: 

tf The method is not marked abstract. 

n The method declaration includes curly braces, as opposed to ending in a semicolon. In other 
words, the method has a method body. 

; The method might provide actual implementation code inside the curly braces. 

Any class that extends an abstract class must implement all abstract methods of the superclass, 
unless the subclass is also abstract. The rule is this: 

The first concrete subclass of an abstract class must implement all abstract methods of the 
superclass. 

Concrete just means nonabstract, so if you have an abstract class extending another abstract class, 
the abstract subclass doesnt need to provide implementations for the inherited abstract methods. 
Sooner or later, though, somebodys going to make a nonabstract subclass (in other words, a class that can 
be instantiated), and that subclass will have to implement all the abstract methods from up the 
inheritance tree. The following example demonstrates an inheritance tree with two abstract classes and 
one concrete class: 


public abstract class Vehicle { 
private String type; 

public abstract void goUpHillO; // Abstract method 
public String getTypeO { // Non-abstract method 

return type; 

} 

} 

public abstract class Car extends Vehicle { 

public abstract void goUpHillO; // Still abstract 
public void doCarThings() { 

// special car code goes here 

} 

} 

public class Mini extends Car { 
public void goUpHillO { 

// Mini-specific going uphill code 

} 

} 

So how many methods does class Mini have? Three. It inherits both the getType () and 
doCarThings () methods because theyre public and concrete (nonabstract). But because goUpHill( ) is 
abstract in the superclass Vehicle and is never implemented in the Car class (so itremains abstract), 
it means class Mini as the first concrete class below Vehicle must implement the goUpHill() 
method. In other words, class Mini cant pass the buck (of abstract method implementation) to the next 
class down the inheritance tree, but class Car can, since Car, like Vehicle, is abstract. Figure 1-5 
illustrates the effects of the abstract modifier on concrete and abstract subclasses. 


startEngine( ) 
abstract goForward( ) 
abstract reverse( ) 
stop( ) 

abstract turn(int whichWay) 


SportsCar 


abstract SUV 

startEngine( )//optional 
goForward( )//Required 
reverse( )//Required 
turn(int whichWay)//Required 

enable4wd( ) 
goForward( ) 
reverse( ) 

abstract goOffRoad( ) 

//turn( )not implemented 

-x- 


Abstract methods must be implemented by a 
nonabstract subclass. If the subclass is abstract, 
it is not required to implement the abstract 
methods, but it is allowed to implement any 
or all of the superclass abstract methods. The 
AcmeRover class is nonabstract, so it must 
implement the abstract method declared in its 
superclass, SUV, and it must also implement 
turn ( ), which was not implemented by SUV. 



enable4wd( )//optional 
goOffRoad( )//Required 
turn(int whichWay)//Required 


FIGURE 1-5 


The effects of the abstract modifier on concrete and abstract subclasses 


Look for concrete classes that dont provide method implementations for abstract methods of the 
superclass. The following code wont compile: 

public abstract class A { 
abstract void foo(); 

} 

class B extends A { 
void foo(int I) { } 

} 

Class B wont compile because it doesnt implement the inherited abstract method foo(). Although 
the f oo (int I) method in class B might appear to be an implementation of the superclasss abstract 
method, it is simply an overloaded method (a method using the same identifier, but different arguments), 
so it doesnt fulfill the requirements for implementing the superclasss abstract method. Well look at 
the differences between overloading and overriding in detail in Chapter 2. 













A method can never, ever, ever be marked as both abstract and final, or both abstract and 
private. Think about itabstract methods must be implemented (which essentially means overridden 
by a subclass), whereas final and private methods cannot ever be overridden by a subclass. Or to 
phrase it another way, an abstract designation means the superclass doesnt know anything about how 
the subclasses should behave in that method, whereas a final designation means the superclass knows 
everything about how all subclasses (however far down the inheritance tree they may be) should behave 
in that method. The abstract and final modifiers are virtually opposites. Because private methods 
cannot even be seen by a subclass (let alone inherited), they, too, cannot be overridden, so they, too, 
cannot be marked abstract. 

Finally, you need to know thatfor top-level classesthe abstract modifier can never be combined 
with the static modifier. Well cover static methods later in this objective, but for now just remember 
that the following would be illegal: 

abstract static void doStuff(); 

And it would give you an error that should be familiar by now: 

MyClass.java:2: illegal combination of modifiers: abstract and static 
abstract static void doStuff(); 

Synchronized Methods 

The synchronized keyword indicates that a method can be accessed by only one thread at a time. When 
you are studying for your OCP 8, youll study the synchronized keyword extensively, but for now...all 
were concerned with is knowing that the synchronized modifier can be applied only to methodsnot 
variables, not classes, just methods. Atypical synchronized declaration looks like this: 

public synchronized Record retrievel)serInfo(int id) { } 

You should also know that the synchronized modifier can be matched with any of the four access 
control levels (which means it can be paired with any of the three access modifier keywords). 

Native Methods 

The native modifier indicates that a method is implemented in platform-dependent code, often in C. You 
dont need to know how to use native methods for the exam, other than knowing that native is a 
modifier (thus a reserved keyword) and that native can be applied only to methods not classes, not 
variables, just methods. Note that a native methods body must be a semicolon (;) (like abstract 
methods), indicating that the implementation is omitted. 

Strictfp Methods 

We looked earlier at using strictfp as a class modifier, but even if you dont declare a class as 
strictfp, you can still declare an individual method as strictfp. Remember, strictfp forces floating 
points (and any floating-point operations) to adhere to the IEEE 754 standard. With strictfp, you can 
predict how your floating points will behave regardless of the underlying platform the JVM is running on. 
The downside is that if the underlying platform is capable of supporting greater precision, astrictfp 
method wont be able to take advantage of it. 

Youll want to study the IEEE 754 if you need something to help you fall asleep. For the exam. 



however, you dont need to know anything about strictf p other than what its used forthat it can 
modify a class or method declaration, and that a variable can never be declared strictf p. 

Methods with Variable Argument Lists (var-args) 

Java allows you to create methods that can take a variable number of arguments. Depending on where you 
look, you might hear this capability referred to as variable-length argument lists, variable arguments, 
var-args, varargs, or our personal favorite (from the department of obfuscation), variable arity 
parameters. Theyre all the same thing, and well use the term var-args from here on out. 

As a bit of background, wed like to clarify how were going to use the terms argument and 
parameter throughout this book: 

i arguments The things you specify between the parentheses when youre invoking a method: 

doStuff("a", 2); // invoking doStuff, so "a" & 2 are 

// arguments 

i parameters The things in the methods signature that indicate what the method must receive 
when its invoked: 

void doStuff(String s, int a) { } //we're expecting two 

// parameters: 

// String and int 

Lets review the declaration rules for var-args: 

 Var-arg type When you declare a var-arg parameter, you must specify the type of the 
argument(s) this parameter of your method can receive. (This can be a primitive type or an object 
type.) 

i Basic syntax To declare a method using a var-arg parameter, you follow the type with an 
ellipsis (...), a space, and then the name of the array that will hold the parameters received. 

i Other parameters Its legal to have other parameters in a method that uses a var-arg. 

 Var-arg limits The var-arg must be the last parameter in the methods signature, and you 
can have only one var-arg in a method. 

m Lets look at some legal and illegal var-arg declarations: 


Legal: 


Illegal: 


void 

doStuff(int... x) 

{ } 




// 

expects from 0 to many ints 







// 

as parameters 

void 

doStuff2(char c, 

int... x) 

{ 

} 


// 

expects first a char, 







// 

then 0 to many ints 

void 

i. 

doStuff3(Animal.. 

. animal) 

{ 

} 


// 

0 to many Animals 

L. 

void 

doStuff4(int x... 

) { } 




// 

bad syntax 

void 

doStuff5(int... x 

, char... 

y) 

{ 

} 

// 

too many var-args 

void 

doStuff6(String.. 

. s, byte 

b) 

{ 

} 

// 

var-arg must be last 


Constructor Declarations 


In Java, objects are constructed. Every time you make a new object, at least one constructor is invoked. 
Every class has a constructor, although if you dont create one explicidy, the compiler will build one for 
you. There are tons of rules concerning constructors, and were saving our detailed discussion for 
Chapter 2. For now, lets focus on the basic declaration rules. Heres a simple example: 

class Foo { 

protected Foo() { } 

protected void Foo() { } 

} 

The first thing to notice is that constructors look an awful lot like methods. A key difference is that a 
constructor cant ever, ever, ever, have a return type... ever! Constructor declarations can, however, have 
all of the normal access modifiers, and they can take arguments (including var-args), just like methods. 
The other BIG RULE to understand about constructors is that they must have the same name as the class in 
which they are declared. Constructors cant be marked static (they are, after all, associated with object 
instantiation), and they cant be marked final or abstract (because they cant be overridden). Here are 
some legal and illegal constructor declarations: 

class Foo2 { 

// legal constructors 
Foo2 () { } 

private Foo2(byte b) { } 

Foo2(int x) { } 

Foo2(int x, int... y) { } 

// illegal constructors 
void Foo2() { } 

Foo () { } 

Foo2(short s); 
static Foo2(float f) { } 
final Foo2(long x) { } 
abstract Foo2(char c) { } 

Foo2(int... x, int t) { } 

} 

Variable Declarations 

There are two types of variables in Java: 

Primitives A primitive can be one of eight types: char, boolean, byte, short, int, long, 
double, or float. Once a primitive has been declared, its primitive type can never change, 
although in most cases its value can change. 

i; Reference variables A reference variable is used to refer to (or access) an object. A 
reference variable is declared to be of a specific type, and that type can never be changed. A 
reference variable can be used to refer to any object of the declared type or of a subtype of the 
declared type (a compatible type). Well talk a lot more about using a reference variable to refer to 
a subtype in Chapter 2, when we discuss polymorphism 


// it's a method, not a constructor 
// not a method or a constructor 
// looks like an abstract method 
// can't be static 
// can't be final 
// can't be abstract 
// bad var-arg syntax 


// this is Foo's constructor 

// this is a badly named, but legal, method 


Declaring Primitives and Primitive Ranges 

Primitive variables can be declared as class variables (statics), instance variables, method parameters, 
or local variables. You can declare one or more primitives, of the same primitive type, in a single line. In 
Chapter 3 we will discuss the various ways in which they can be initialized, but for now well leave you 
with a few examples of primitive variable declarations: 

byte b; 

boolean myBooleanPrimitive; 

int x, y, z; // declare three int primitives 

On previous versions of the exam you needed to know how to calculate ranges for all the Java 
primitives. For the current exam, you can skip some of that detail, but its still important to understand that 
for the integer types the sequence from small to big is byte, short, int, and long, and that doubles are 
bigger than floats. 

You will also need to know that the number types (both integer and floating-point types) are all signed 
and how that affects their ranges. First, lets review the concepts. 

All six number types in Java are made up of a certain number of 8-bit bytes and are signed, meaning 
they can be negative or positive. The leftmost bit (the most significant digit) is used to represent the sign, 
where a 1 means negative and 0 means positive, as shown in Figure 1-6. The rest of the bits represent the 
value, using twos complement notation. 




0 0010011 



1 111110100000011 


FIGURE 1-6 


The sign bit for a byte 



TABLE 1-3 


Ranges of Numeric Primitives 


Type 

Bits 

Bytes 

Minimum Range 

Maximum Range 

byte 

8 

1 

-2 7 

2 7 -1 

short 

16 

2 

-2 15 

2 15 - 1 

int 

32 

4 

-2 31 

2 31 - 1 

long 

64 

8 

-2 63 

2 63 -1 

float 

32 

4 

n/a 

n/a 

double 

64 

8 

n/a 

n/a 


















Table 1-3 shows the primitive types with their sizes and ranges. Figure 1-6 shows that with a byte, for 
example, there are 256 possible numbers (or 2 8 ). Half of these are negative, and half - 1 are positive. The 
positive range is one less than the negative range because the number 0 is stored as a positive binary 
number. We use the formula -2^ blts_1 ^ to calculate the negative range, and we use 2^ blts_1 ^ - 1 for the 
positive range. Again, if you know the first two columns of this table, youll be in good shape for the 
exam. 

The range for floating-point numbers is complicated to determine, but luckily you dont need to know 
these for the exam (although you are expected to know that a double holds 64 bits and a float 32). 

There is not a range of boolean values; a boolean can be only true or false. If someone asks you 
for the bit depth of a boolean, look them straight in the eye and say, Thats virtual-machine dependent. 
Theyll be impressed. 

The char type (a character) contains a single, 16-bit Unicode character. Although the extended ASCII 
set known as ISO Latin-1 needs only 8 bits (256 different characters), a larger range is needed to 
represent characters found in languages other than English. Unicode characters are actually represented by 
unsigned 16-bit integers, which means 2 16 possible values, ranging from 0 to 65535 (2 16 - 1). Youll learn 
in Chapter 3 that because a char is really an integer type, it can be assigned to any number type large 
enough to hold 65535 (which means anything larger than a short; although both chars and shorts are 
16-bit types, remember that a short uses 1 bit to represent the sign, so fewer positive numbers are 
acceptable in a short). 

Declaring Reference Variables 

Reference variables can be declared as static variables, instance variables, method parameters, or local 
variables. You can declare one or more reference variables, of the same type, in a single line. In Chapter 
3 we will discuss the various ways in which they can be initialized, but for now well leave you with a 
few examples of reference variable declarations: 

Object o; 

Dog myNewDogReferenceVariable; 

String si, s2, s3; // declare three String vars. 

Instance Variables 

Instance variables are defined inside the class, but outside of any method, and are initialized only when 
the class is instantiated. Instance variables are the fields that belong to each unique object. For example, 
the following code defines fields (instance variables) for the name, tide, and manager for employee 
objects: 

class Employee { 

// define fields (instance variables) for employee instances 
private String name; 
private String title; 
private String manager; 

// other code goes here including access methods for private 
// fields 

} 

The preceding Employee class says that each employee instance will know its own name, tide, and 
manager. In other words, each instance can have its own unique values for those three fields. For the 


exam, you need to know that instance variables 

 Can use any of the four access levels (which means they can be marked with any of the three 
access modifiers ) 

 Can be marked final 

 Can be marked transient 

 Cannot be marked abstract 

 Cannot be marked synchronized 

 Cannot be marked strictfp 

 Cannot be marked native 

 Cannot be marked static because then theyd become class variables 

Weve already covered the effects of applying access control to instance variables (it works the same 
way as it does for member methods). A little later in this chapter well look at what it means to apply the 
final or transient modifier to an instance variable. First, though, well take a quick look at the 
difference between instance and local variables. Figure 1-7 compares the way in which modifiers can be 
applied to methods versus variables. 


Local 

Variables 


Variables 

(nonlocal) 


Methods 


final 

final 

final 


public 

public 


protected 

protected 


private 

private 


static 

transient 

volatile 

static 

abstract 

synchronized 

strictfp 

native 


FIGURE 1-7 


Comparison of modifiers on variables vs. methods 


Local (Automatic/Stack/Method) Variables 

A local variable is a variable declared within a method. That means the variable is not just initialized 
within the method, but also declared within the method. Just as the local variable starts its life inside the 
method, its also destroyed when the method has completed. Local variables are always on the stack, not 
the heap. (Well talk more about the stack and the heap in Chapter 3.) Although the value of the variable 
might be passed into, say, another method that then stores the value in an instance variable, the variable 
itself lives only within the scope of the method. 

Just dont forget that while the local variable is on the stack, if the variable is an object reference, the 
object itself will still be created on the heap. There is no such thing as a stack object, only a stack 
variable. Youll often hear programmers use the phrase local object, but what they really mean is, 
locally declared reference variable. So if you hear a programmer use that expression, youll know that 
hes just too lazy to phrase it in a technically precise way. You can tell him we said thatunless he knows 
where we live. 







Local variable declarations cant use most of the modifiers that can be applied to instance variables, 
such as public (or the other access modifiers), transient, volatile, abstract, or static, but as we 
saw earlier, local variables can be marked final. And as youll learn in Chapter 3 (but heres a 
preview), before a local variable can be used, it must be initialized with a value. For instance: 

class TestServer { 

public void login() { 

int count = 10; 

} 

} 

Typically, youll initialize a local variable in the same line in which you declare it, although you might 
still need to reassign it later in the method. The key is to remember that a local variable must be 
initialized before you try to use it. The compiler will reject any code that tries to use a local variable that 
hasnt been assigned a value becauseunlike instance variableslocal variables dont get default 
values. 

A local variable cant be referenced in any code outside the method in which its declared. In the 
preceding code example, it would be impossible to refer to the variable count anywhere else in the class 
except within the scope of the method login (). Again, thats not to say that the value of count cant be 
passed out of the method to take on a new life. But the variable holding that value, count, cant be 
accessed once the method is complete, as the following illegal code demonstrates: 

class TestServer { 

public void login() { 

int count = 10; 

} 

public void doSomething(int i) { 

count = i; // Won't compile! Can't access count outside 
// method login() 

} 

} 

It is possible to declare a local variable with the same name as an instance variable. Its known as 
shadowing, as the following code demonstrates: 

class TestServer { 

int count =9; // Declare an instance variable named count 

public void login() { 

int count = 10; // Declare a local variable named count 

System.out.println("local variable count is " + count); 

} 

public void count() { 

System.out.println("instance variable count is 

} 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
new TestServer().login(); 


+ count); 



new TestServer().count(); 

} 

} 

The preceding code produces the following output: 

local variable count is 10 
instance variable count is 9 

Why on Earth (or the planet of your choice) would you want to do that? Normally, you wont. But one 
of the more common reasons is to name a parameter with the same name as the instance variable to which 
the parameter will be assigned. 

The following (wrong) code is trying to set an instance variables value using a parameter: 

class Foo { 

int size = 27; 

public void setSize(int size) { 

size = size; // ??? which size equals which size??? 

} 

} 

So youve decided thatfor overall readabilityyou want to give the parameter the same name as the 
instance variable its value is destined for, but how do you resolve the naming collision? Use the keyword 
this. The keyword this always, always, always refers to the object currently running. The following 
code shows this in action: 

class Foo { 

int size = 27; 

public void setSize(int size) { 

this.size = size; // this.size means the current object's 

// instance variable, size. The size 
// on the right is the parameter 

} 

} 

Array Declarations 

In Java, arrays are objects that store multiple variables of the same type or variables that are all 
subclasses of the same type. Arrays can hold either primitives or object references, but an array itself 
will always be an object on the heap, even if the array is declared to hold primitive elements. In other 
words, there is no such thing as a primitive array, but you can make an array of primitives. 

For the exam, you need to know three things: 

i How to make an array reference variable (declare) 
li How to make an array object (construct) 
i How to populate the array with elements (initialize) 

For this objective, you only need to know how to declare an array; well cover constructing and 
initializing arrays in Chapter 5. 


an. (pi* 


Arrays are efficient, but many times youll want to use one of the Collection types from java.util 
(including HashMap, Array List, and TreeSet). Collection classes offer more flexible ways to 
access an object (for insertion, deletion, reading, and so on) and, unlike arrays, can expand or 
contract dynamically as you add or remove elements. There are Collection types for a wide range of 
needs. Do you need a fast sort? A group of objects with no duplicates? A way to access a name-value 
pair? Java provides a wide variety of Collection types to address these situations, but the only 
Collection type on the exam is ArrayList, and Chapter 5 discusses ArrayList in more detail. 

Arrays are declared by stating the type of elements the array will hold (an object or a primitive), 
followed by square brackets to either side of the identifier. 

Declaring an Array of Primitives: 

int[] key; // Square brackets before name (recommended) 

int key []; // Square brackets after name (legal but less 

// readable) 

Declaring an Array of Object References: 

Thread[] threads; // Recommended 

Thread threads []; // Legal but less readable 


When declaring an array reference, you should always put the array brackets immediately after the 
declared type, rather than after the identifier (variable name). That way, anyone reading the code 
can easily tell that, for example, key is a reference to an int array object, not an int primitive. 

We can also declare multidimensional arrays, which are, in fact, arrays of arrays. This can be done in 
the following manner: 

String[][][] occupantName; 

String[] managerName []; 

The first example is a three-dimensional array (an array of arrays of arrays), and the second is a two- 
dimensional array. Notice in the second example, we have one square bracket before the variable name 
and one after. This is perfecdy legal to the compiler, proving once again that just because its legal 
doesnt mean its right. 



 a t c h 


It is never legal to include the size of the array in your declaration. Yes, we know you can do 
that in some other languages, which is why you might see a question or two that include code 
similar to the following: 

int[5] scores; 

The preceding code wont compile. Remember, the JVM doesnt allocate space until you 
actually instantiate the array object. Thats when size matters. 





In Chapter 6, well spend a lot of time discussing arrays, how to initialize and use them and how to 
deal with multidimensional arrays.. .stay tuned! 

Final Variables 

Declaring a variable with the final keyword makes it impossible to reassign that variable once it has 
been initialized with an explicit value (notice we said explicit rather than default). For primitives, 
this means that once the variable is assigned a value, the value cant be altered. For example, if you 
assign 10 to the int variable x, then x is going to stay 10, forever. So thats straightforward for 
primitives, but what does it mean to have a final object reference variable? A reference variable 
marked final can never be reassigned to refer to a different object. The data within the object can be 
modified, but the reference variable cannot be changed. In other words, a final reference still allows 
you to modify the state of the object it refers to, but you cant modify the reference variable to make it 
refer to a different object. Burn this in: there are no final objects, only final references. Well explain 
this in more detail in Chapter 3. 

Weve now covered how the final modifier can be applied to classes, methods, and variables. Figure 
1-8 highlights the key points and differences of the various applications of final. 





final 

class 


final class 
cannot be 
subclassed 



final 

method 



final method 
cannot be 
overridden by 
a subclass 


final 

variable 



final variable cannot be 
assigned a new value, once 
the initial method is made 
(the initial assignment of a 
value must happen before 
the constructor completes) 


FIGURE 1-8 


Effect of final on variables, methods, and classes 


Transient Variables 

If you mark an instance variable as transient, youre telling the JVM to skip (ignore) this variable when 
you attempt to serialize the object containing it. Serialization is one of the coolest features of Java; it lets 
you save (sometimes called flatten) an object by writing its state (in other words, the value of its 
instance variables) to a special type of I/O stream. With serialization, you can save an object to a file or 
even ship it over a wire for reinflating (deserializing) at the other end in another JVM. We were happy 
when serialization was added to the exam as of Java 5, but were sad to say that as of Java 7, 
serialization is no longer on the exam. 


Volatile Variables 

The volatile modifier tells the JVM that a thread accessing the variable must always reconcile its own 
private copy of the variable with the master copy in memory. Say what? Dont worry about it. For the 















exam, all you need to know about volatile is that it exists. 


* <m * h* 

The volatile modifier may also be applied to project managers! 

Static Variables and Methods 

Note: The discussion of static in this section DOES NOT include the new static interface method 
discussed earlier in this chapter. Dont you just love how the Java 8 folks reused important Java terms? 

The static modifier is used to create variables and methods that will exist independendy of any 
instances created for the class. All static members exist before you ever make a new instance of a class, 
and there will be only one copy of a static member regardless of the number of instances of that class. 

In other words, all instances of a given class share the same value for any given static variable. Well 
cover static members in great detail in the next chapter. 

Things you can mark as static: 

i Methods 

 Variables 

 A class nested within another class, but not within a method (not on the OCA 8 exam) 

 Initialization blocks 

Things you cant mark as static: 

 Constructors (makes no sense; a constructor is used only to create instances) 

Classes (unless they are nested) 

Interfaces (unless they are nested) 
i Method local inner classes (not on the OCA 8 exam) 

 Inner class methods and instance variables (not on the OCA 8 exam) 

i Local variables 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Declare and Use enums (OCA Objective 1.2) 

1.2 Define the structure of a Java class. 

Note: During the creation of this book, Oracle adjusted some of the objectives for the OCA exam. 
Were not 100 percent sure that the topic of enums is included in the OCA exam, but weve decided that 
its better to be safe than sorry, so we recommend that OCA candidates study this section. In any case, 
youre likely to encounter the use of enums in the Java code you read, so learning about them will pay off 
regardless. 



Declaring enums 

Java lets you restrict a variable to having one of only a few predefined valuesin other words, one value 
from an enumerated list. (The items in the enumerated list are called, surprisingly, enums.) 

Using enums can help reduce the bugs in your code. For instance, imagine youre creating a 
commercial-coffee-establishment application, and in your coffee shop application, you might want to 
restrict your Cof f eeSize selections to BIG, HUGE, and OVERWHELMING. If you let an order for a LARGE 
or a GRANDE slip in, it might cause an error, enums to the rescue. With the following simple declaration, 
you can guarantee that the compiler will stop you from assigning anything to a Cof f eeSize except BIG, 
huge, or overwhelming: 

enum CoffeeSize { BIG, HUGE, OVERWHELMING }; 

From then on, the only way to get a CoffeeSize will be with a statement something like this: 

CoffeeSize cs = CoffeeSize.BIG; 

Its not required that enum constants be in all caps, but borrowing from the Oracle code convention that 
constants are named in caps, its a good idea. 

The basic components of an enum are its constants (that is, BIG, HUGE, and OVERWHELMING), although in 
a minute youll see that there can be a lot more to an enum. enums can be declared as their own separate 
class or as a class member; however, they must not be declared within a method! 

Heres an example declaring an enum outside a class: 

enum CoffeeSize { BIG, HUGE, OVERWHELMING 

class Coffee { 

CoffeeSize size; 

} 

public class CoffeeTestl { 

public static void main(String[] args) 

Coffee drink = new Coffee(); 
drink.size = CoffeeSize.BIG; 

} 

} 

The preceding code can be part of a single file (or, in general, enum classes can exist in their own file 
like CoffeeSize . java). But remember, in this case the file must be named CoffeeTestl. java because 
thats the name of the public class in the file. The key point to remember is that an enum that isnt 
enclosed in a class can be declared with only the public or default modifier, just like a non-inner class. 
Heres an example of declaring an enum inside a class: 


} // this cannot be 

// private or protected 


// enum outside class 


class Coffee2 { 

enum CoffeeSize {BIG, HUGE, OVERWHELMING } 

CoffeeSize size; 

} 

public class CoffeeTest2 { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Coffee2 drink = new Coffee2(); 

drink.size = Coffee2.CoffeeSize.BIG; // enclosing class 

// name required 

} 

i 

The key points to take away from these examples are that enums can be declared as their own class or 
enclosed in another class, and that the syntax for accessing an enums members depends on where the 
enum was declared. 

The following is NOT legal: 

public class CoffeeTestl { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

enum CoffeeSize { BIG, HUGE, OVERWHELMING } // WRONG! Cannot 

// declare enums 
// in methods 

Coffee drink = new Coffee(); 
drink.size = CoffeeSize.BIG; 

} 

} 

To make it more confusing for you, the Java language designers made it optional to put a semicolon at 
the end of the enum declaration (when no other declarations for this enum follow): 

public class CoffeeTestl { 

enum CoffeeSize { BIG, HUGE, OVERWHELMING }; // <--semicolon 

// is optional here 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Coffee drink = new Coffee(); 
drink.size = CoffeeSize.BIG; 

} 

} 

So what gets created when you make an enum? The most important thing to remember is that enums are 
not Strings or ints! Each of the enumerated CoffeeSize values is actually an instance of CoffeeSize. 
In other words, BIG is of type CoffeeSize. Think of an enum as a kind of class that looks something (but 
not exactly) like this: 


// conceptual example of how you can think 
// about enums 
class CoffeeSize { 

public static final CoffeeSize BIG = 

new CoffeeSize("BIG", 0); 

public static final CoffeeSize HUGE = 

new CoffeeSize("HUGE", 1); 

public static final CoffeeSize OVERWHELMING = 

new CoffeeSize("OVERWHELMING", 2); 

CoffeeSize(String enumName, int index) { 

// stuff here 

} 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.println(CoffeeSize.BIG); 

} 

} 

Notice how each of the enumerated values, big, huge, and overwhelming, is an instance of type 
CoffeeSize. Theyre represented as static and final, which, in the Java world, is thought of as a 
constant. Also notice that each enum value knows its index or positionin other words, the order in 
which enum values are declared matters. You can think of the CoffeeSize enums as existing in an array 
of type CoffeeSize, and as youll see in a later chapter, you can iterate through the values of an enum by 
invoking the values () method on any enum type. (Dont worry about that in this chapter.) 

Declaring Constructors, Methods, and Variables in an enum 

Because an enum really is a special kind of class, you can do more than just list the enumerated constant 
values. You can add constructors, instance variables, methods, and something really strange known as a 
constant specific class body. To understand why you might need more in your enum, think about this 
scenario: Imagine you want to know the actual size, in ounces, that map to each of the three CoffeeSize 
constants. For example, you want to know that big is 8 ounces, huge is 10 ounces, and overwhelming is 
a whopping 16 ounces. 

You could make some kind of a lookup table using some other data structure, but that would be a poor 
design and hard to maintain. The simplest way is to treat your enum values (BIG, HUGE, and 
overwhelming) as objects, each of which can have its own instance variables. Then you can assign those 
values at the time the enums are initialized by passing a value to the enum constructor. This takes a little 
explaining, but first look at the following code: 


enum CoffeeSize { 

// 8 , 10 & 16 are passed to the constructor 

BIG(8), HUGE(10), OVERWHELMING(16); 

CoffeeSize(int ounces) { // constructor 

this.ounces = ounces; 

} 

private int ounces; // an instance variable 

public int getOuncesO { 
return ounces; 

} 

} 


class Coffee { 

CoffeeSize size; // each instance of Coffee has an enum 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Coffee drinkl = new CoffeeO; 
drinkl.size = CoffeeSize.BIG; 

Coffee drink2 = new CoffeeO; 

drink2.size = CoffeeSize.OVERWHELMING; 

System.out.printIn(drinkl.size.getOunces()); // prints 8 

for(CoffeeSize cs: CoffeeSize.values()) 

System.out.printIn(cs + " " + cs.getOunces()); 

} 

! 

which produces: 

8 

BIG 8 

HUGE 10 

OVERWHELMING 16 

Note: Every enum has a static method, values (), that returns an array of the enums values in the order 
theyre declared. 

The key points to remember about enum constructors are 

 You can NEVER invoke an enum constructor direcdy. The enum constructor is invoked 
automatically, with the arguments you define after the constant value. For example, big ( 8 ) invokes 
the CoffeeSize constructor that takes an int, passing the int literal 8 to the constructor. (Behind 
the scenes, of course, you can imagine that big is also passed to the constructor, but we dont have 
to knowor careabout the details.) 

 You can define more than one argument to the constructor, and you can overload the enum 
constructors, just as you can overload a normal class constructor. We discuss constructors in much 
more detail in Chapter 2. To initialize a CoffeeSize with both the number of ounces and, say, a lid 
type, youd pass two arguments to the constructor as big ( 8, "A" ), which means you have a 
constructor in CoffeeSize that takes both an int and a String. 

And, finally, you can define something really strange in an enum that looks like an anonymous inner 



class. Its known as a constant specific class body, and you use it when you need a particular constant to 
override a method defined in the enum. 

Imagine this scenario: You want enums to have two methodsone for ounces and one for lid code (a 
String). Now imagine that most coffee sizes use the same lid code, "B", but the OVERWHELMING size uses 
type "A". You can define a getLidCode( ) method in the CoffeeSize enum that returns "B", but then you 
need a way to override it for OVERWHELMING. You dont want to do some hard-to-maintain if/then code 
in the getLidCode( ) method, so the best approach might be to somehow have the OVERWHELMING 
constant override the getLidCode( ) method. 

This looks strange, but you need to understand the basic declaration rules: 

enum CoffeeSize { 

BIG (8) , 

HUGE(10), 

OVERWHELMING(16) { // start a code block that defines 

// the "body for this constant 


public String getLidCodeO { // override the method 

// defined in CoffeeSize 

return "A"; 


} 


}; 


// the semicolon is REQUIRED when more code follows 


CoffeeSize(int ounces) { 
this.ounces = ounces; 

} 


private int ounces; 

public int getOunces() { 
return ounces; 

} 

public String getLidCodeO { 


return "B"; 


} 


} 


// this method is overridden 
//by the OVERWHELMING constant 

// the default value we want to 
// return for CoffeeSize constants 


CERTIFICATION SUMMARY 

After absorbing the material in this chapter, you should be familiar with some of the nuances of the Java 
language. You may also be experiencing confusion around why you ever wanted to take this exam in the 
first place. Thats normal at this point. If you hear yourself asking, What was I thinking? just lie down 
until it passes. We would like to tell you that it gets easier.. .that this was the toughest chapter and its all 
downhill from here. 

Lets briefly review what youll need to know for the exam: 

There will be many questions dealing with keywords indirecdy, so be sure you can identify which are 
keywords and which arent. 



You need to understand the rules associated with creating legal identifiers and the rules associated 
with source code declarations, including the use of package and import statements. 

You learned the basic syntax for the j ava and j avac command-line programs. 

You learned about when main () has superpowers and when it doesnt. 

We covered the basics of import and import static statements. Its tempting to think that theres 
more to them than saving a bit of typing, but there isnt. 

You now have a good understanding of access control as it relates to classes, methods, and variables. 
Youve looked at how access modifiers (public, protected, and private) define the access control of 
a class or member. 

You learned that abstract classes can contain both abstract and nonabstract methods, but that if 
even a single method is marked abstract, the class must be marked abstract. Dont forget that a 
concrete (nonabstract) subclass of an abstract class must provide implementations for all the abstract 
methods of the superclass, but that an abstract class does not have to implement the abstract methods 
from its superclass. An abstract subclass can pass the buck to the first concrete subclass. 

We covered interface implementation. Remember that interfaces can extend another interface (even 
multiple interfaces), and that any class that implements an interface must implement all methods from all 
the interfaces in the inheritance tree of the interface the class is implementing. 

Youve also looked at the other modifiers, including static, final, abstract, synchronized, and 
so on. Youve learned how some modifiers can never be combined in a declaration, such as mixing 
abstract with either final or private. 

Keep in mind that there are no final objects in Java. A reference variable marked final can never be 
changed, but the object it refers to can be modified. Youve seen that final applied to methods means a 
subclass cant override them, and when applied to a class, the final class cant be subclassed. 

Methods can be declared with a var-arg parameter (which can take from zero to many arguments of the 
declared type), but that you can have only one var-arg per method, and it must be the methods last 
parameter. 

Make sure youre familiar with the relative sizes of the numeric primitives. Remember that while the 
values of nonfinal variables can change, a reference variables type can never change. 

You also learned that arrays are objects that contain many variables of the same type. Arrays can also 
contain other arrays. 

Remember what youve learned about static variables and methods, especially that static members 
are per-class as opposed to per-instance. Dont forget that a static method cant direcdy access an 
instance variable from the class its in because it doesnt have an explicit reference to any particular 
instance of the class. 

Finally, we covered enums. An enum is a safe and flexible way to implement constants. Because they 
are a special kind of class, enums can be declared very simply, or they can be quite complexincluding 
such attributes as methods, variables, constructors, and a special type of inner class called a constant 
specific class body. 

Before you hurl yourself at the practice test, spend some time with the following optimistically named 
Two-Minute Drill. Come back to this particular drill often as you work through this book and 
especially when youre doing that last-minute cramming. Becauseand heres the advice you wished 
your mother had given you before you left for collegeits not what you know, its when you know it. 

For the exam, knowing what you cant do with the Java language is just as important as knowing what 
you can do. Give the sample questions a try! Theyre very similar to the difficulty and structure of the real 
exam questions and should be an eye opener for how difficult the exam can be. Dont worry if you get a 
lot of them wrong. If you find a topic that you are weak in, spend more time reviewing and studying. Many 



programmers need two or three serious passes through a chapter (or an individual objective) before they 
can answer the questions confidendy. 


/ TWO-MINUTE DRILL 

Remember that in this chapter, when we talk about classes, were referring to non-inner classes, in other 
words, top-level classes. 

Java Features and Benefits (OCA Objective 1.5) 

? While Java provides many benefits to programmers, for the exam you should remember that 
Java supports object-oriented programming in general, encapsulation, automatic memory 
management, a large API (library), built-in security features, multiplatform compatibility, strong 
typing, multithreading, and distributed computing. 

Identifiers (OCA Objective 2.1) 

? Identifiers can begin with a letter, an underscore, or a currency character. 

? After the first character, identifiers can also include digits. 

? Identifiers can be of any length. 

Executable Java Files and main() (OCA Objective 1.3) 

? You can compile and execute Java programs using the command-line programs j avac and 
j ava, respectively. Both programs support a variety of command-line options. 

? The only versions of main ( ) methods with special powers are those versions with method 
signatures equivalent to public static void main(String[] args). 

? main() can be overloaded. 

Imports (OCA Objective 1.4) 

? An import statements only job is to save keystrokes. 

? You can use an asterisk (*) to search through the contents of a single package. 

? Although referred to as static imports, the syntax is import static.... 

? You can import API classes and/or custom classes. 

Source File Declaration Rules (OCA Objective 1.2) 

? A source code file can have only one public class. 

? If the source file contains a public class, the filename must match the public class name. 

? A file can have only one package statement, but it can have multiple imports. 

? The package statement (if any) must be the first (noncomment) line in a source file. 

? The import statements (if any) must come after the package statement (if any) and before the 


first class declaration. 

? If there is no package statement, import statements must be the first (noncomment) statements 
in the source file. 

? package and import statements apply to all classes in the file. 

? A file can have more than one nonpublic class. 

? Files with no public classes have no naming restrictions. 

Class Access Modifiers (OCA Objective 6.4) 

? There are three access modifiers: public, protected, and private. 

? There are four access levels: public, protected, default, and private. 

? Classes can have only public or default access. 

? A class with default access can be seen only by classes within the same package. 

? A class with public access can be seen by all classes from all packages. 

? Class visibility revolves around whether code in one class can 

? Create an instance of another class 

? Extend (or subclass) another class 

? Access methods and variables of another class 

Class Modifiers (Nonaccess) (OCA Objectives 1.2, 7.1, and 7.5) 

? Classes can also be modified with final, abstract, or strictf p. 

? A class cannot be both final and abstract. 

? A final class cannot be subclassed. 

? Anabstract class cannot be instantiated. 

? Asingle abstract method ina class means the whole class must be abstract. 

? An abstract class can have both abstract and nonabstract methods. 

? The first concrete class to extend an abstract class must implement all of its abstract 
methods. 

Interface Implementation (OCA Objective 7.5) 

? Usually, interfaces are contracts for what a class can do, but they say nothing about the way in 
which the class must do it. 

? Interfaces can be implemented by any class from any inheritance tree. 

? Usually, an interface is like a 100 percent abstract class and is implicidy abstract whether 
or not you type the abstract modifier in the declaration. 

? Usually interfaces have only abstract methods. 

? Interface methods are by default public and usually abstractexplicit declaration of these 
modifiers is optional. 



? Interfaces can have constants, which are always implicitly public, static, and final. 

? Interface constant declarations of public, static, and final are optional in any 
combination. 

? As of Java 8, interfaces can have concrete methods declared as either default or static. 
Note: This section uses some concepts that we HAVE NOT yet covered. Dont panic: once youve read 
through all of the book, this section will make sense as a reference. 

? A legal nonabstract implementing class has the following properties: 

? It provides concrete implementations for the interfaces methods. 

? It must follow all legal override rules for the methods it implements. 

? It must not declare any new checked exceptions for an implementation method. 

? It must not declare any checked exceptions that are broader than the exceptions declared 
in the interface method. 

? It may declare runtime exceptions on any interface method implementation regardless of 
the interface declaration. 

? It must maintain the exact signature (allowing for covariant returns) and return type of the 
methods it implements (but does not have to declare the exceptions of the interface). 

? A class implementing an interface can itself be abstract. 

? An abstract implementing class does not have to implement the interface methods (but the 
first concrete subclass must). 

? A class can extend only one class (no multiple inheritance), but it can implement many 
interfaces. 

? Interfaces can extend one or more other interfaces. 

? Interfaces cannot extend a class or implement a class or interface. 

? When taking the exam, verify that interface and class declarations are legal before verifying 
other code logic. 

Member Access Modifiers (OCA Objective 6.4) 

? Methods and instance (nonlocal) variables are known as members. 

? Members can use all four access levels: public, protected, default, and private. 

? Member access comes in two forms: 

? Code in one class can access a member of another class. 

? A subclass can inherit a member of its superclass. 

? If a class cannot be accessed, its members cannot be accessed. 

? Determine class visibility before determining member visibility. 

? public members can be accessed by all other classes, even in other packages. 

? If a superclass member is public, the subclass inherits itregardless of package. 

? Members accessed without the dot operator (.) must belong to the same class. 


? this. always refers to the currently executing object. 

? this. aMethod() is the same as just invoking aMethod(). 

? private members can be accessed only by code in the same class. 

? private members are not visible to subclasses, so private members cannot be inherited. 

? Default and protected members differ only when subclasses are involved: 

? Default members can be accessed only by classes in the same package. 

? protected members can be accessed by other classes in the same package, plus 
subclasses, regardless of package. 

? protected = package + kids (kids meaning subclasses). 

? For subclasses outside the package, the protected member can be accessed only through 
inheritance; a subclass outside the package cannot access a protected member by using a 
reference to a superclass instance. (In other words, inheritance is the only mechanism for a 
subclass outside the package to access a protected member of its superclass.) 

? A protected member inherited by a subclass from another package is not accessible to 
any other class in the subclass package, except for the subclasss own subclasses. 

Local Variables (OCA Objectives 2.1 and 6.4) 

? Local (method, automatic, or stack) variable declarations cannot have access modifiers. 

? final is the only modifier available to local variables. 

? Local variables dont get default values, so they must be initialized before use. 

Other ModifiersMembers (OCA Objectives 7.1 and 7.5) 

? final methods cannot be overridden in a subclass. 

? abstract methods are declared with a signature, a return type, and an optional throws 
clause, but they are not implemented. 

? abstract methods end in a semicolonno curly braces. 

? Three ways to spot a nonabstract method: 

? The method is not marked abstract. 

? The method has curly braces. 

? The method MIGHT have code between the curly braces. 

? The first nonabstract (concrete) class to extend an abstract class must implement all of the 
abstract classs abstract methods. 

? The synchronized modifier applies only to methods and code blocks. 

? synchronized methods can have any access control and can also be marked final. 

? abstract methods must be implemented by a subclass, so they must be inheritable. For that 
reason 

? abstract methods cannot be private. 


? abstract methods cannot be final. 

? The native modifier applies only to methods. 

? The strictfp modifier applies only to classes and methods. 

Methods with var-args (OCA Objective 1.2) 

? Methods can declare a parameter that accepts from zero to many arguments, a so-called var- 
arg method. 

? A var-arg parameter is declared with the syntax type. . . name; for instance: 
doStuff(int... x) { }. 

? A var-arg method can have only one var-arg parameter. 

? In methods with normal parameters and a var-arg, the var-arg must come last. 

Constructors (OCA Objectives 1.2, and 6.3) 

? Constructors must have the same name as the class 

? Constructors can have arguments, but they cannot have a return type. 

? Constructors can use any access modifier (even private!). 

Variable Declarations (OCA Objective 2.1) 

? Instance variables can 

? Have any access control 

? Be marked final or transient 

? Instance variables cant be abstract, synchronized, native, or strictfp. 

? It is legal to declare a local variable with the same name as an instance variable; this is 
called shadowing. 

? final variables have the following properties: 

? final variables cannot be reassigned once assigned a value. 

? final reference variables cannot refer to a different object once the object has been 
assigned to the final variable. 

? final variables must be initialized before the constructor completes. 

? There is no such thing as a final object. An object reference marked final does NOT mean 
the object itself cant change. 

? The transient modifier applies only to instance variables. 

? The volatile modifier applies only to instance variables. 

Array Declarations (OCA Objectives 4.1 and 4.2) 

? Arrays can hold primitives or objects, but the array itself is always an object. 

? When you declare an array, the brackets can be to the left or to the right of the variable name. 


? It is never legal to include the size of an array in the declaration. 

? An array of objects can hold any object that passes the IS-A (or instanceof ) test for the 
declared type of the array. For example, if Horse extends Animal, then a Horse object can go into 
an Animal array. 

Static Variables and Methods (OCA Objective 6.2) 

? They are not tied to any particular instance of a class. 

? No class instances are needed in order to use static members of the class or interface. 

? There is only one copy of a static variable/class, and all instances share it. 

? static methods do not have direct access to nonstatic members. 

enums (OCA Objective 1.2) 

? An enurn specifies a list of constant values assigned to a type. 

? Anenum is NOT a string or anint; anenum constants type is the enum type. For example, 
SUMMER and FALL are of the enum type Season. 

? An enum can be declared outside or inside a class, but NOT in a method. 

? Anenum declared outside a class must NOT be marked static, final, abstract, 
protected, or private. 

? enums can contain constructors, methods, variables, and constant-specific class bodies. 

? enum constants can send arguments to the enum constructor, using the syntax BIG (8), where 
the int literal 8 is passed to the enum constructor. 

? enum constructors can have arguments and can be overloaded. 

? enum constructors can NEVER be invoked direcdy in code. They are always called 
automatically when an enum is initialized. 

? The semicolon at the end of an enum declaration is optional. These are legal: 

? enum Foo { ONE, TWO, THREE} enum Foo { ONE, TWO, THREE}; 

? MyEnum. values ( ) returns an array of MyEnums values. 


SELF TEST 

The following questions will help you measure your understanding of the material presented in this 
chapter. Read all the choices carefully, as there may be more than one correct answer. Choose all correct 
answers for each question. Stay focused. 

If you have a rough time with these at first, dont beat yourself up. Be positive. Repeat nice 
affirmations to yourself like, I am smart enough to understand enums and OK, so that other guy knows 
enums better than I do, but I bet he cant <insert something you are good at> like me. 

1. Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. X extends Y is correct if and only if X is a class and Y is an interface 


B. X extends Y is correct if and only if X is an interface and Y is a class 

C. X extends Y is correct if X and Y are either both classes or both interfaces 

D. X extends Y is correct for all combinations of X and Y being classes and/or interfaces 

2. Given: 

class Rocket { 

private void blastoff() { System.out.print("bang "); } 

} 

public class Shuttle extends Rocket { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
new Shuttle () .go() ; 

} 

void go() { 

blastoff(); 

// Rocket.blastoff(); // line A 

} 

private void blastoff() { System.out.print("sh-bang "); } 

} 

Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. As the code stands, the output is bang 

B. As the code stands, the output is sh - bang 

C. As the code stands, compilation fails 

D. If line A is uncommented, the output is bang bang 

E. If line A is uncommented, the output is sh - bang bang 

F. If line A is uncommented, compilation fails. 

3. Given that the for loops syntax is correct, and given: 

import static java.lang.System.*; 
class _ { 

static public void main(String[] A V ) { 

String $ = " 11 ; 

for(int x=0; + +x < A V .length; ) // for loop 

$ += A V [x] ; 
out.printIn($); 

} 

} 

And the command line: 
java _ - A . 

What is the result? 

A. -A 

B. A. 

C. -A. 


D. _A. 

E. _-A. 

F. Compilation fails 

G. An exception is thrown at runtime 

4. Given: 

1. enum Animals { 

2. DOG("woof"), CAT("meow"), FISH("burble"); 

3. String sound; 

4. Animals(String s) { sound = s; } 

5- } 

6. class TestEnum { 

7. static Animals a; 

8. public static void main(String[] args) { 

9. System.out.printIn(a.DOG.sound + " " + a.FISH.sound) 

10 . } 

ii. } 

What is the result? 

A. woof burble 

B. Multiple compilation errors 

C. Compilation fails due to an error on line 2 

D. Compilation fails due to an error on line 3 

E. Compilation fails due to an error on line 4 

F. Compilation fails due to an error on line 9 

5. Given two files: 

1. package pkgA; 

2. public class Foo { 

3. int a = 5; 

4. protected int b = 6; 

5. public int c = 7; 

6 . } 

3. package pkgB; 

4. import pkgA.*; 

5. public class Baz { 

6. public static void main(String[] args) { 

7. Foo f = new Foo(); 

8. System.out.print(" " + f.a); 

9. System.out.print(" " + f.b); 

10. System.out.printIn(" " + f.c); 

11. } 

12 . } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. 5 6 7 


B. 5 followed by an exception 

C. Compilation fails with an error on line 7 

D. Compilation fails with an error on line 8 

E. Compilation fails with an error on line 9 

F. Compilation fails with an error on line 10 

6. Given: 

1. public class Electronic implements Device 
{ public void doIt() { } } 

2 . 

3. abstract class Phonel extends Electronic { } 

4 . 

5. abstract class Phone2 extends Electronic 
{ public void doIt(int x) { } } 

6 . 

7. class Phone3 extends Electronic implements Device 
{ public void doStuffO { } } 

8 . 

9. interface Device { public void doIt(); } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Compilation succeeds 

B. Compilation fails with an error on line 1 

C. Compilation fails with an error on line 3 

D. Compilation fails with an error on line 5 

E. Compilation fails with an error on line 7 

F. Compilation fails with an error on line 9 


7. Given: 

4. class Announce { 

5. public static void main(String[] args) { 

6. for(int _ x = 0; _X < 3; _X++) ; 

7. int #lb = 7; 

8. long [] x [5] ; 

9. Boolean []ba [] ; 

10 . } 

11 . } 


What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Compilation succeeds 

B. Compilation fails with an error on line 6 

C. Compilation fails with an error on line 7 

D. Compilation fails with an error on line 8 

E. Compilation fails with an error on line 9 


8. Given: 


3. public class TestDays { 

4. public enum Days { MON, TUE, WED }; 

5. public static void main(String[] args) { 

6. for(Days d : Days.values() ) 

7. 

8. Days [] d2 = Days.values(); 

9. System.out.printIn(d2[2]); 

10 . } 

11 . } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. TUE 

B. WED 

C. The output is unpredictable 

D. Compilation fails due to an error on line 4 

E. Compilation fails due to an error on line 6 

F. Compilation fails due to an error on line 8 

G. Compilation fails due to an error on line 9 

9. Given: 

4. public class Frodo extends Hobbit { 

5. public static void main(String[] args) { 

6. int myGold = 7; 

7. System.out.println(countGold(myGold, 6)) 

8 . } 

9 - } 

10. class Hobbit { 

11. int countGold(int x, int y) { return x + y 

12 . } 

What is the result? 

A. 13 

B. Compilation fails due to multiple errors 

C. Compilation fails due to an error on line 6 

D. Compilation fails due to an error on line 7 

E. Compilation fails due to an error on line 11 


10 . Given: 


interface Gadget { 
void doStuff(); 

} 

abstract class Electronic { 

void getPowerO { System.out.print("plug in "); } 

} 

public class Tablet extends Electronic implements Gadget { 
void doStuff() { System.out.print("show book "); } 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
new Tablet () .getPowerO ; 
new Tablet().doStuff(); 

} 

} 

Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. The class Tablet will NOT compile 

B. The interface Gadget will NOT compile 

C. The output will be plug in show book 

D. The abstract class Electronic will NOT compile 

E. The class Tablet CANNOT both extend and implement 

11 . Given that the Integer class is in the java.lang package and given: 

1. // insert code here 

2. class StatTest { 

3. public static void main(String[] args) { 

4. System.out.printIn(Integer.MAX_VALUE); 

5 - } 

6 . } 

Which, inserted independently at line 1, compiles? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. import static java.lang; 

B. import static java.lang.Integer; 

C. import static java.lang.Integer; 

D. static import java.lang.Integer. 

E. import static java.lang.Integer.MAX_VALUE; 

F. None of the above statements are valid import syntax 

12 . Given: 

interface Mylnterface { 

// insert code here 

} 

Which lines of codeinserted independently at insert code herewill compile? (Choose all 
that apply.) 

A. public static ml() {;} 

B. default void m2() {;} 



C. abstract int m3(); 

D. final short m4() {return 5;} 

E. default long m5(); 

F. static void m6() {;} 

13. Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Java is a dynamically typed programming language 

B. Java provides fine-grained control of memory through the use of pointers 

C. Java provides programmers the ability to create objects that are well encapsulated 

D. Java provides programmers the ability to send Java objects from one machine to another 

E. Java is an implementation of the ECMA standard 

F. Javas encapsulation capabilities provide its primary security mechanism 


SELF TEST ANSWERS 


1. 0 C is correct. 

S3 A is incorrect because classes implement interfaces, they dont extend them. B is incorrect 
because interfaces only inherit from other interfaces. D is incorrect based on the preceding rules. 
(OCAObjective 7.5) 

2. 0 B and F are correct. Since Rocket. blastoff () is private, it cant be overridden, and it 
is invisible to class Shuttle. 

S3 A, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 6.4) 

3. 0 B is correct. This question is using valid (but inappropriate and weird) identifiers, static 
imports, main (), and pre-incrementing logic. (Note: You might get a compiler warning when 
compiling this code.) 

SI A, C, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 1.2) 

4. 0 A is correct; enums can have constructors and variables. 

S3 B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect; these lines all use correct syntax. (OCA Objective 1.2) 

5. 0 D and E are correct. Variable a has default access, so it cannot be accessed from outside 
the package. Variable b has protected access in pkgA. 

S3 A, B, C, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objectives 1.4 and 6.5) 

6. 0 A is correct; all of these are legal declarations. 

S3 B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objective 7.5) 

7. 0 C and D are correct. Variable names cannot begin with a #, and an array declaration cant 
include a size without an instantiation. The rest of the code is valid. 

S3 A, B, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 2.1) 

8. 0 B is correct. Every enum comes with a static values ( ) method that returns an array of 
the enums values in the order in which they are declared in the enum. 

S3 A, C, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above information. (OCP Objective 1.2) 


9. 0 D is correct. The countGold() method cannot be invoked from a static context. 

S3 A, B, C, and E are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objective 6.2) 

10. 0 A is correct. By default, an interfaces methods are public so the Tablet. doStuf f 
method must be public, too. The rest of the code is valid. 

3 B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 7.5) 

11. 0 C and E are correct syntax for static imports. Line 4 isnt making use of static imports, 
so the code will also compile with none of the imports. 

3 A, B, D, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 1.4) 

12. 0 B, C, and F are correct. As of Java 8, interfaces can have default and static methods. 
S3 A, D, and E are incorrect. A has no return type; D cannot have a method body; and E needs a 
method body. (OCA Objective 7.5) 

13. 0 C and D are correct. 

3 A is incorrect because Java is a statically typed language. B is incorrect because it does not 
provide pointers. E is incorrect because JavaScript is an implementation of the ECMA standard, 
not Java. F is incorrect because the use of bytecode and the JVM provide Javas primary security 
mechanisms. 




2 

Object Orientation 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES 


 Describe Encapsulation 

 Implement Inheritance 

 Use IS-A and HAS-A Relationships (OCP) 

 Use Polymorphism 

 Use Overriding and Overloading 

 Understand Casting 

 Use Interfaces 

 Understand and Use Return Types 

 Develop Constructors 

 Use static Members 
/ Two-Minute Drill 

Q&A Self Test 


B eing an Oracle Certified Associate (OCA) 8 means you must be at one with the object- 
oriented aspects of Java. You must dream of inheritance hierarchies; the power of 
polymorphism must flow through you; and encapsulation must become second nature to you. 
(Coupling, cohesion, composition, and design patterns will become your bread and butter 
when youre an Oracle Certified Professional [OCP] 8.) This chapter will prepare you for all the object- 
oriented objectives and questions youll encounter on the exam We have heard of many experienced Java 
programmers who havent really become fluent with the object-oriented tools that Java provides, so well 
start at the beginning. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Encapsulation (OCA Objectives 6.1 and 6.5) 

6.1 Create methods with arguments and return values; including overloaded methods. 

6.5 Apply encapsulation principles to a class. 

Imagine you wrote the code for a class and another dozen programmers from your company all wrote 
programs that used your class. Now imagine that later on, you didnt like the way the class behaved, 





because some of its instance variables were being set (by the other programmers from within their code) 
to values you hadnt anticipated. Their code brought out errors in your code. (Relax, this is just 
hypothetical.) Well, it is a Java program, so you should be able to ship out a newer version of the class, 
which they could replace in their programs without changing any of their own code. 

This scenario highlights two of the promises/benefits of an object-oriented (OO) language: flexibility 
and maintainability. But those benefits dont come automatically. You have to do something. You have to 
write your classes and code in a way that supports flexibility and maintainability. So what if Java 
supports OO? It cant design your code for you. For example, imagine you made your class with public 
instance variables, and those other programmers were setting the instance variables direcdy, as the 
following code demonstrates: 

public class BadOO { 
public int size; 
public int weight; 

} 

public class ExploitBadOO { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

BadOO b = new BadOO(); 

b.size = -5; // Legal but bad!! 

} 

} 

And now youre in trouble. How are you going to change the class in a way that lets you handle the 
issues that come up when somebody changes the size variable to a value that causes problems? Your 
only choice is to go back in and write method code to adjust size (a setSize ( int a) method, for 
example) and then insulate the size variable with, say, a private access modifier. But as soon as you 
make that change to your code, you break everyone elses! 

The ability to make changes in your implementation code without breaking the code of others who use 
your code is a key benefit of encapsulation. You want to hide implementation details behind a public 
programming interface. By interface, we mean the set of accessible methods your code makes available 
for other code to callin other words, your codes API. By hiding implementation details, you can 
rework your method code (perhaps also altering the way variables are used by your class) without forcing 
a change in the code that calls your changed method. 

If you want maintainability, flexibility, and extensibility (and, of course, you do), your design must 
include encapsulation. How do you do that? 

 Keep instance variables hidden (with an access modifier, often private). 

i Make public accessor methods, and force calling code to use those methods rather than 
directly accessing the instance variable. These so-called accessor methods allow users of your 
class to set a variables value or get a variables value. 

 For these accessor methods, use the most common naming convention of set<SomeProperty> 
and get<SomeProperty>. 

Figure 2-1 illustrates the idea that encapsulation forces callers of our code to go through methods 
rather than accessing variables directly. 



Class A cannot access Class B instance variable data 
without going through getter and setter methods. Data is 
marked private; only the accessor methods are public. 


FIGURE 2-1 


The nature of encapsulation 


We call the access methods getters and setters, although some prefer the fancier terms accessors and 
mutators. (Personally, we dont like the word mutate.) Regardless of what you call them, theyre 
methods that other programmers must go through in order to access your instance variables. They look 
simple, and youve probably been using them forever: 

public class Box { 

// hide the instance variable; only an instance 
//of Box can access it 
private int size; 

// Provide public getters and setters 
public int getSizeO { 
return size; 


} 

































public void setSize(int newSize) { 
size = newSize; 

} 

} 


Wait a minute. How useful is the previous code? It doesnt even do any validation or processing. What 
benefit can there be from having getters and setters that add no functionality? The point is, you can change 
your mind later and add more code to your methods without breaking your API. Even if today you dont 
think you really need validation or processing of the data, good OO design dictates that you plan for the 
future. To be safe, force calling code to go through your methods rather than going direcdy to instance 
variables. Always. Then youre free to rework your method implementations later, without risking the 
wrath of those dozen programmers who know where you live. 

Note: In Chapter 6 well revisit the topic of encapsulation as it applies to instance variables that are 
also reference variables. Its trickier than you might think, so stay tuned! (Also, well wait until Chapter 6 
to challenge you with encapsulation-themed mock questions.) 



 a t c h 


Look out for code that appears to be asking about the behavior of a method, when the problem 
is actually a lack of encapsulation. Look at the following example, and see if you can figure 
out whats going on: 

class Foo { 

public int left = 9; 
public int right = 3; 
public void setLeft(int leftNum) { 
left = leftNum; 
right = leftNum/3; 

} 

// lots of complex test code here 

} 

Now consider this question: Is the value of right always going to be one-third the value of left? 
It looks like it will, until you realize that users of the Foo class dont need to use the setLeftf) 
method! They can simply go straight to the instance variables and change them to any 
arbitrary int value. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Inheritance and Polymorphism (OCA Objectives 7.1 and 
7.2) 


7.1 Describe inheritance and its benefits. 

7.2 Develop code that demonstrates the use of polymorphism; including overriding and object type 





versus reference type (sic). 


Inheritance is everywhere in Java. Its safe to say that its almost (almost?) impossible to write even 
the tiniest Java program without using inheritance. To explore this topic, were going to use the 
instanceof operator, which well discuss in more detail in Chapter 4. For now, just remember that 
instanceof returns true if the reference variable being tested is of the type being compared to. This 
code 


class Test { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Test tl = new Test(); 

Test t2 = new Test(); 
if (!tl. equals (t2)) 

System.out.printIn("they're not equal"); 
if (tl instanceof Object) 

System.out.println("tl 1 s an Object"); 

} 

} 

produces this output: 

they're not equal 
tl's an Object 

Where did that equals method come from? The reference variable tl is of type Test, and theres no 
equals method in the Test class. Or is there? The second if test asks whether tl is an instance of class 
Ob j ect, and because it is (more on that soon), the if test succeeds. 

Hold on... how can tl be an instance of type Object, when we just said it was of type Test? Im sure 
youre way ahead of us here, but it turns out that every class in Java is a subclass of class Ob j ect (except, 
of course, class Ob j ect itself). In other words, every class youll ever use or ever write will inherit from 
class Object. Youll always have an equals method, a clone method, notify, wait, and others 
available to use. Whenever you create a class, you automatically inherit all of class obj ects methods. 

Why? Lets look at that equals method for instance. Javas creators correcdy assumed that it would be 
very common for Java programmers to want to compare instances of their classes to check for equality. If 
class Obj ect didnt have an equals method, youd have to write one yourselfyou and every other Java 
programmer. That one equals method has been inherited billions of times. (To be fair, equals has also 
been overridden billions of times, but were getting ahead of ourselves.) 


The Evolution of Inheritance 

Up until Java 8, when the topic of inheritance was discussed, it usually revolved around subclasses 
inheriting methods from their superclasses. While this simplification was never perfecdy correct, it 
became less correct with the new features available in Java 8. As the following table shows, its now 
possible to inherit concrete methods from interfaces. This is a big change. For the rest of the chapter, 
when we talk about inheritance generally, we will tend to use the terms subtypes and supertypes to 
acknowledge that both classes and interfaces need to be accounted for. We will tend to use the terms 
subclass and superclass when were discussing a specific example thats under discussion. 
Inheritance is a key aspect of most of the topics well be discussing in this chapter, so be prepared for 
LOTS of discussion about the interactions between supertypes and subtypes! 


As you study the following table, youll notice that as of Java 8 interfaces can contain two types of 
concrete methods, static and default. Well discuss these important additions later in this chapter. 
Table 2-1 summarizes the elements of classes and interfaces relative to inheritance. 


TABLE 2-1 


Inheritable Elements of Classes and Interfaces 


Elements of Types 

Classes 

Interfaces 

Instance variables 

Yes 

Not applicable 

Static variables 

Yes 

Only constants 

Abstract methods 

Yes 

Yes 

Instance methods 

Yes 

Java 8, default methods 

Static methods 

Yes 

Java 8, inherited no, 
accessible yes 

Constructors 

No 

Not applicable 

Initialization blocks 

No 

Not applicable 


For the exam, youll need to know that you can create inheritance relationships in Java by extending a 
class or by implementing an interface. Its also important to understand that the two most common reasons 
to use inheritance are 

 To promote code reuse 

 To use polymorphism 

Lets start with reuse. A common design approach is to create a fairly generic version of a class with 
the intention of creating more specialized subclasses that inherit from it. For example: 













class GameShape { 

public void displayShape() { 

System.out.println("displaying shape"); 

} 

// more code 

} 

class PlayerPiece extends GameShape { 
public void movePieceO { 

System.out.println("moving game piece"); 

} 

// more code 

} 


public class TestShapes { 

public static void main (String[] args) { 

PlayerPiece shape = new PlayerPiece(); 
shape.displayShape(); 
shape.movePiece() ; 

} 

} 

outputs: 

displaying shape 

moving game piece 

Notice that the PlayerPiece class inherits the generic displayShape( ) method from the less- 
specialized class GameShape and also adds its own method, movePiece (). Code reuse through 
inheritance means that methods with generic functionalitysuch as displayShape (), which could apply 
to a wide range of different kinds of shapes in a gamedont have to be reimplemented. That means all 
specialized subclasses of GameShape are guaranteed to have the capabilities of the more general 
superclass. You dont want to have to rewrite the displayShape () code in each of your specialized 
components of an online game. 

But you knew that. Youve experienced the pain of duplicate code when you make a change in one 
place and have to track down all the other places where that same (or very similar) code exists. 

The second (and related) use of inheritance is to allow your classes to be accessed polymorphically 
a capability provided by interfaces as well, but well get to that in a minute. Lets say that you have a 
GameLauncher class that wants to loop through a list of different kinds of GameShape objects and invoke 
displayShape () on each of them At the time you write this class, you dont know every possible kind of 
GameShape subclass that anyone else will ever write. And you sure dont want to have to redo your code 
just because somebody decided to build a dice shape six months later. 

The beautiful thing about polymorphism (many forms) is that you can treat any subclass of 
GameShape as a GameShape. In other words, you can write code in your GameLauncher class that says, I 
dont care what kind of object you are as long as you inherit from (extend) GameShape. And as far as Im 
concerned, if you extend GameShape, then youve definitely got a displayShape () method, so I know I 
can call it. 

Imagine we now have two specialized subclasses that extend the more generic GameShape class, 
PlayerPiece and TilePiece: 


class GameShape { 

public void displayShape() { 

System.out.println("displaying shape"); 

} 

// more code 

} 

class PlayerPiece extends GameShape { 
public void movePiece() { 

System.out.println("moving game piece"); 

} 

// more code 

} 

class TilePiece extends GameShape { 
public void getAdjacent() { 

System.out.println("getting adjacent tiles"); 

} 

// more code 

} 

Now imagine a test class has a method with a declared argument type of GameShape, which means it 
can take any kind of GameShape. In other words, any subclass of GameShape can be passed to a method 
with an argument of type GameShape. This code 

public class TestShapes { 

public static void main (String[] args) { 

PlayerPiece player = new PlayerPiece(); 

TilePiece tile = new TilePiece(); 

doShapes(player); 
doShapes(tile) ; 

} 

public static void doShapes(GameShape shape) { 

shape.displayShape(); 

} 

} 

outputs: 

displaying shape 
displaying shape 

The key point is that the doShapes () method is declared with a GameShape argument but can be 
passed any subtype (in this example, a subclass) of GameShape. The method can then invoke any method 
of GameShape, without any concern for the actual runtime class type of the object passed to the method. 
There are implications, though. The doShapes () method knows only that the objects are a type of 
GameShape since thats how the parameter is declared. And using a reference variable declared as type 
GameShape regardless of whether the variable is a method parameter, local variable, or instance 
variablemeans that only the methods of GameShape can be invoked on it. The methods you can call on a 
reference are totally dependent on the declared type of the variable, no matter what the actual object is, 
that the reference is referring to. That means you cant use a GameShape variable to call, say, the 
getAdj acent () method even if the object passed in is of type TilePiece. (Well see this again when we 



look at interfaces.) 


IS-A and HAS-A Relationships 

Note: As of Winter 2017, the OCA 8 exam wont ask you directly about IS-A and HAS-A relationships. 
But understanding IS-A and HAS-A relationships will help OCA 8 candidates with many of the questions 
on the exam. 

ISA 

In OO, the concept of IS-A is based on inheritance (or interface implementation). IS-A is a way of saying, 
This thing is a type of that thing. For example, a Mustang is a type of Horse, so in OO terms we can say, 
Mustang IS-A Horse. Subaru IS-A Car. Broccoli IS-A Vegetable (not a very fun one, but it still counts). 
You express the IS-A relationship in Java through the keywords extends (for class inheritance) and 
implements (for interface implementation). 

public class Car { 

// Cool Car code goes here 

} 


public class Subaru extends Car { 

// Important Subaru-specific stuff goes here 

// Don't forget Subaru inherits accessible Car members which 
// can include both methods and variables. 

} 

A Car is a type of Vehicle, so the inheritance tree might start from the Vehicle class as follows: 

public class Vehicle { ... } 

public class Car extends Vehicle { ... } 

public class Subaru extends Car { ... } 


In OO terms, you can say the following: 

Vehicle is the superclass of Car. 

Car is the subclass of Vehicle. 

Car is the superclass of Subaru. 

Subaru is the subclass of Vehicle. 

Car inherits from Vehicle. 

Subaru inherits from both Vehicle and Car. 

Subaru is derived from Car. 

Car is derived from Vehicle. 

Subaru is derived from Vehicle. 

Subaru is a subtype of both Vehicle and Car. 

Returning to our IS-A relationship, the following statements are true: 

"Car extends Vehicle" means "Car IS-A Vehicle." 
"Subaru extends Car" means "Subaru IS-A Car." 


And we can also say: 


Subaru IS-A Vehicle 

because a class is said to be a type of anything further up in its inheritance tree. If the expression (Foo 
instanceof Bar) is true, then class Foo IS-A Bar, even if Foo doesnt directly extend Bar, but instead 
extends some other class that is a subclass of Bar. Figure 2-2 illustrates the inheritance tree for Vehicle, 
Car, and Subaru. The arrows move from the subclass to the superclass. In other words, a classs arrow 
points toward the class from which it extends. 



FIGURE 2-2 


Inheritance tree for Vehicle, 


Car, 


Subaru 


HAS-A 

HAS-A relationships are based on use, rather than inheritance. In other words, class A HAS-A B if code 
in class A has a reference to an instance of class B. For example, you can say the following: 

A Horse IS-A Animal. A Horse HAS-A Halter. 


The code might look like this: 








public class Animal { } 
public class Horse extends Animal { 
private Halter myHalter; 

} 

In this code, the Horse class has an instance variable of type Halter (a halter is a piece of gear you might 
have if you have a horse), so you can say that a Horse HAS-A Halter. In other words, Horse has a 
reference to a Halter. Horse code can use that Halter reference to invoke methods on the Halter and 
get Halter behavior without having Halter-related code (methods) in the Horse class itself. Figure 2-3 
illustrates the HAS-A relationship between Horse and Halter. 


Horse 


Halter h 


tie(Rope r). 


Halter 

. tie (Rope r) 


Horse class has a Halter, because Horse 
declares an instance variable of type Halter. 
When code invokes tied on a Horse instance, 
the Horse invokes tie () on the Horse 
objects Halter instance variable. 


FIGURE 2-3 


HAS-A relationship between Horse and Halter 


HAS-A relationships allow you to design classes that follow good OO practices by not having 
monolithic classes that do a gazillion different things. Classes (and their resulting objects) should be 
specialists. As our friend Andrew says, Specialized classes can actually help reduce bugs. The more 
specialized the class, the more likely it is that you can reuse the class in other applications. If you put all 








the Halter-related code direcdy into the Horse class, youll end up duplicating code in the Cow class, 
Unpaidlntern class, and any other class that might need Halter behavior. By keeping the Halter code 
in a separate, specialized Halter class, you have the chance to reuse the Halter class in multiple 
applications. 

Users of the Horse class (that is, code that calls methods on a Horse instance) think that the Horse 
class has Halter behavior. The Horse class might have a tie(LeadRope rope) method, for example. 
Users of the Horse class should never have to know that when they invoke the tie( ) method, the Horse 
object turns around and delegates the call to its Halter class by invoking myHalter. tie (rope). The 
scenario just described might look like this: 

public class Horse extends Animal { 

private Halter myHalter = new Halter(); 
public void tie(LeadRope rope) { 

myHalter.tie(rope); // Delegate tie behavior to the 

// Halter object 

} 

} 

public class Halter { 

public void tie(LeadRope aRope) { 

// Do the actual tie work here 

} 

} 

In OO, we dont want callers to worry about which class or object is actually doing the real work. To 
make that happen, the Horse class hides implementation details from Horse users. Horse users ask the 
Horse object to do things (in this case, tie itself up), and the Horse will either do it or, as in this example, 
ask something else (like perhaps an inherited Animal class method) to do it. To the caller, though, it 
always appears that the Horse object takes care of itself. Users of a Horse should not even need to know 
that there is such a thing as a Halter class. 


FROM THE CLASSROOM 


Object-Oriented Design 

IS-A and HAS-A relationships and encapsulation are just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to OO 
design. Many books and graduate theses have been dedicated to this topic. The reason for the 
emphasis on proper design is simple: money. The cost to deliver a software application has been 
estimated to be as much as ten times more expensive for poorly designed programs. 

Even the best OO designers (often called "architects") make mistakes. It is difficult to visualize the 
relationships between hundreds, or even thousands, of classes. When mistakes are discovered during 
the implementation (code writing) phase of a project, the amount of code that must be rewritten can 
sometimes mean programming teams have to start over from scratch. 

The software industry has evolved to aid the designer. Visual object modeling languages, such as 
the Unified Modeling Language (UML), allow designers to design and easily modify classes without 
having to write code first because OO components are represented graphically. This allows designers 
to create a map of the class relationships and helps them recognize errors before coding begins. 













Another innovation in OO design is design patterns. Designers noticed that many OO designs apply 
consistendy from project to project and that it was useful to apply the same designs because it reduced 
the potential to introduce new design errors. OO designers then started to share these designs with 
each other. Now there are many catalogs of these design patterns both on the Internet and in book form 
Although passing the Java certification exam does not require you to understand OO design this 
thoroughly, hopefully this background information will help you better appreciate why the test writers 
chose to include encapsulation and IS-A and HAS-A relationships on the exam 

Jonathan Meeks, 
Sun Certified Java Programmer 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Polymorphism (OCA Objective 7.2) 

7.2 Develop code that demonstrates the use of polymorphism; including overriding and object type 
versus reference type (sic). 

Remember that any Java object that can pass more than one IS-A test can be considered polymorphic. 
Other than objects of type Ob j ect, all Java objects are polymorphic in that they pass the IS-A test for 
their own type and for class Object. 

Remember, too, that the only way to access an object is through a reference variable. There are a few 
key things you should know about references: 

 A reference variable can be of only one type, and once declared, that type can never be 
changed (although the object it references can change). 

 A reference is a variable, so it can be reassigned to other objects (unless the reference is 
declared final). 

 A reference variables type determines the methods that can be invoked on the object the 
variable is referencing. 

 A reference variable can refer to any object of the same type as the declared reference, or 
this is the big oneit can refer to any subtype of the declared type! 

 A reference variable can be declared as a class type or an interface type. If the variable is 
declared as an interface type, it can reference any object of any class that implements the interface. 

Earlier we created a GameShape class that was extended by two other classes, PlayerPiece and 
TilePiece. Now imagine you want to animate some of the shapes on the gameboard. But not all shapes 
are able to be animated, so what do you do with class inheritance? 

Could we create a class with an animate () method and have only some of the GameShape subclasses 
inherit from that class? If we can, then we could have PlayerPiece, for example, extend both the 
GameShape class and Animatable class, whereas the TilePiece would extend only GameShape. But no, 
this wont work! Java supports only single class inheritance! That means a class can have only one 
immediate superclass. In other words, if PlayerPiece is a class, there is no way to say something like 
this: 










class PlayerPiece extends GameShape, Animatable { // NO! 

// more code 

} 

A class cannot extend more than one class: that means one parent per class. A class can have multiple 
ancestors, however, since class B could extend class A, and class C could extend class B, and so on. So 
any given class might have multiple classes up its inheritance tree, but thats not the same as saying a class 
direcdy extends two classes. 


Some languages (such as C++) allow a class to extend more than one other class. This capability is 
known as multiple inheritance. The reason that Javas creators chose not to allow multiple class 
inheritance is that it can become quite messy. In a nutshell, the problem is that if a class extended 
two other classes, and both superclasses had, say, a doStuff() method, which version of doStuff() 
would the subclass inherit? This issue can lead to a scenario known as the Deadly Diamond of 
Death, because of the shape of the class diagram that can be created in a multiple inheritance 
design. The diamond is formed when classes B and C both extend A, and both B and C inherit a 
method from A. If class D extends both B and C, and both B and C have overridden the method in A, 
class D has, in theory, inherited two different implementations of the same method. Drawn as a 
class diagram, the shape of the four classes looks like a diamond. 

So if that doesnt work, what else could you do? You could simply put the animate () code in 
GameShape, and then disable the method in classes that cant be animated. But thats a bad design choice 
for many reasonsits more error prone; it makes the GameShape class less cohesive; and it means the 
GameShape API advertises that all shapes can be animated when, in fact, thats not true since only some 
of the GameShape subclasses will be able to run the animate! ) method successfully. 



ath 


To reiterate, as of Java 8, interfaces can have concrete methods (called default methods). This 
allows for a form of multiple interhance, which well discuss later in the chapter. 


So what else could you do? You already know the answercreate an Animatable interface, and have 
only the GameShape subclasses that can be animated implement that interface. Heres the interface: 

public interface Animatable { 
public void animate(); 

} 


And heres the modified PlayerPiece class that implements the interface: 




class PlayerPiece extends GameShape implements Animatable { 

public void movePiece() { 

System.out.printIn("moving game piece"); 

} 

public void animate() { 

System.out.printIn("animating..."); 

} 

// more code 

} 

So now we have a PlayerPiece that passes the IS-Atest for both the GameShape class and the 
Animatable interface. That means a PlayerPiece can be treated polymorphically as one of four things at 
any given time, depending on the declared type of the reference variable: 

An Ob j ect (since any object inherits from Ob j ect) 

A GameShape (since PlayerPiece extends GameShape) 

 A PlayerPiece (since thats what it really is) 

An Animatable (since PlayerPiece implements Animatable) 

The following are all legal declarations. Look closely: 

PlayerPiece player = new PlayerPiece () ; 

Object o = player; 

GameShape shape = player; 

Animatable mover = player; 

Theres only one object herean instance of type PlayerPiece but there are four different types of 
reference variables, all referring to that one object on the heap. Pop quiz: Which of the preceding 
reference variables can invoke the displayShape( ) method? Hint: Only two of the four declarations can 
be used to invoke the displayShape( ) method. 

Remember that method invocations allowed by the compiler are based solely on the declared type of 
the reference, regardless of the object type. So looking at the four reference types again Ob j ect, 
GameShape, PlayerPiece, and Animatable which of these four types know about the 
displayShape( ) method? 

You guessed itboth the GameShape class and the PlayerPiece class are known (by the compiler) to 
have a displayShape( ) method, so either of those reference types can be used to invoke 
displayShape( ). Remember that to the compiler, a PlayerPiece IS-A GameShape, so the compiler 
says, I see that the declared type is PlayerPiece, and since PlayerPiece extends GameShape, that 
means PlayerPiece inherited the displayShape( ) method. Therefore, PlayerPiece can be used to 
invoke the displayShape( ) method. 

Which methods can be invoked when the PlayerPiece object is being referred to using a reference 
declared as type Animatable? Only the animate () method. Of course, the cool thing here is that any 
class from any inheritance tree can also implement Animatable, so that means if you have a method with 
an argument declared as type Animatable, you can pass in PlayerPiece objects, SpinningLogo 
objects, and anything else thats an instance of a class that implements Animatable. And you can use that 
parameter (of type Animatable) to invoke the animate () method, but not the displayShape( ) method 
(which it might not even have), or anything other than what is known to the compiler based on the 
reference type. The compiler always knows, though, that you can invoke the methods of class Ob j ect on 



any object, so those are safe to call regardless of the referenceclass or interfaceused to refer to the 
object. 

Weve left out one big part of all this, which is that even though the compiler only knows about the 
declared reference type, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) at runtime knows what the object really is. And 
that means that even if the PlayerPiece objects displayShape( ) method is called using a GameShape 
reference variable, if the PlayerPiece overrides the displayShape( ) method, the JVM will invoke the 
PlayerPiece version! The JVM looks at the real object at the other end of the reference, sees that it 
has overridden the method of the declared reference variable type, and invokes the method of the objects 
actual class. But there is one other thing to keep in mind: 

Polymorphic method invocations apply only to instance methods. You can always refer to an object with a more general 
reference variable type (a superclass or interface), but at runtime, the ONLY things that are dynamically selected based on the 
actual object (rather than the reference type) are instance methods. Not static methods. Not variables. Only overridden 
instance methods are dynamically invoked based on the real objects type. 

Because this definition depends on a clear understanding of overriding and the distinction between static 
methods and instance methods, well cover those later in the chapter. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Overriding/Overloading (OCA Objectives 6.1 and 7.2) 

6.1 Create methods with arguments and return values; including overloaded methods. 

7.2 Develop code that demonstrates the use of polymorphism; including overriding and object type 
versus reference type (sic). 

The exam will use overridden and overloaded methods on many, many questions. These two concepts 
are often confused (perhaps because they have similar names?), but each has its own unique and complex 
set of rules. Its important to get really clear about which over uses which rules! 


Overridden Methods 

Any time a type inherits a method from a supertype, you have the opportunity to override the method 
(unless, as you learned earlier, the method is marked final). The key benefit of overriding is the ability 
to define behavior thats specific to a particular subtype. The following example demonstrates a Horse 
subclass of Animal overriding the Animal version of the eat () method: 

public class Animal { 
public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Generic Animal Eating Generically"); 

} 

} 

class Horse extends Animal { 
public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Horse eating hay, oats, " 

+ "and horse treats"); 

} 


} 





For abstract methods you inherit from a supertype, you have no choice: You must implement the 
method in the subtype unless the subtype is also abstract. Abstract methods must be implemented by the 
first concrete subclass, but this is a lot like saying the concrete subclass overrides the abstract methods of 
the supertype(s). So you could think of abstract methods as methods youre forced to override 
eventually. 

The Animal class creator might have decided that for the purposes of polymorphism, all Animal 
subtypes should have an eat () method defined in a unique way. Polymorphically, when an Animal 
reference refers not to an Animal instance, but to an Animal subclass instance, the caller should be able 
to invoke eat () on the Animal reference, but the actual runtime object (say, a Horse instance) will run its 
own specific eat () method. Marking the eat () method abstract is the Animal programmers way of 
saying to all subclass developers, It doesnt make any sense for your new subtype to use a generic eat () 
method, so you have to come up with your own eat () method implementation! A (nonabstract) example 
of using polymorphism looks like this: 


public class TestAnimals { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Animal a = new Animal(); 

Animal b = new Horse(); // Animal ref, but a Horse object 

a. eat(); // Runs the Animal version of eat() 

b. eat(); // Runs the Horse version of eat() 


} 

} 

class Animal { 

public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Generic Animal Eating Generically"); 

} 

} 

class Horse extends Animal { 
public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Horse eating hay, oats, " 

+ "and horse treats"); 


} 

public void buck() { } 


In the preceding code, the test class uses an Animal reference to invoke a method on a Horse object. 
Remember, the compiler will allow only methods in class Animal to be invoked when using a reference 
to an Animal. The following would not be legal given the preceding code: 

Animal c = new Horse(); 

c.buck(); / / Can't invoke buck(); 

// Animal class doesn't have that method 


To reiterate, the compiler looks only at the reference type, not the instance type. Polymorphism lets you 
use a more abstract supertype (including an interface) reference to one of its subtypes (including interface 
implementers). 

The overriding method cannot have a more restrictive access modifier than the method being 
overridden (for example, you cant override a method marked public and make it protected). Think 
about it: If the Animal class advertises a public eat () method and someone has an Animal reference 
(in other words, a reference declared as type Animal), that someone will assume its safe to call eat () 
on the Animal reference regardless of the actual instance that the Animal reference is referring to. If a 



subtype were allowed to sneak in and change the access modifier on the overriding method, then suddenly 
at runtimewhen the JVM invokes the true objects (Horse) version of the method rather than the 
reference types (Animal) versionthe program would die a horrible death. (Not to mention the 
emotional distress for the one who was betrayed by the rogue subtype.) 

Lets modify the polymorphic example we saw earlier in this section: 


public class TestAnimals { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 


Animal 

a 

= new Animal(); 






Animal 

b 

= new Horse(); 

// 

Animal ref, but 

a Horse object 

a.eat() 

 ; 


// 

Runs 

the 

Animal 

version of eat() 

b.eat () 

} 

 ; 


// 

Runs 

the 

Horse version of eat() 

} 

class Animal 

{ 







public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Generic Animal Eating Generically"); 

} 

} 

class Horse extends Animal { 

private void eat() { // whoa! - it's private! 

System.out.println("Horse eating hay, oats, " 

+ "and horse treats"); 

} 

} 

If this code compiled (which it doesnt), the following would fail at runtime: 

Animal b = new Horsed ; // Animal ref, but a Horse 

// object, so far so good 
b.eat(); // Meltdown at runtime! 

The variable b is of type Animal, which has a public eat () method. But remember that at runtime, 
Java uses virtual method invocation to dynamically select the actual version of the method that will run, 
based on the actual instance. An Animal reference can always refer to a Horse instance, because Horse 
IS-A(n) Animal. What makes that supertype reference to a subtype instance possible is that the subtype is 
guaranteed to be able to do everything the supertype can do. Whether the Horse instance overrides the 
inherited methods of Animal or simply inherits them, anyone with an Animal reference to a Horse 
instance is free to call all accessible Animal methods. For that reason, an overriding method must fulfill 
the contract of the superclass. 

Note: In Chapter 5 we will explore exception handling in detail. Once youve studied Chapter 5, youll 
appreciate this single handy list of overriding rules. The rules for overriding a method are as follows: 

; The argument list must exacdy match that of the overridden method. If they dont match, you 
can end up with an overloaded method you didnt intend. 

i The return type must be the same as, or a subtype of, the return type declared in the original 
overridden method in the superclass. (More on this in a few pages when we discuss covariant 
returns.) 

li The access level cant be more restrictive than that of the overridden method. 

I: The access level CAN be less restrictive than that of the overridden method. 



 Instance methods can be overridden only if they are inherited by the subtype. A subtype within 
the same package as the instances supertype can override any supertype method that is not marked 
private or final. A subtype in a different package can override only those nonfinal methods 
marked public or protected (since protected methods are inherited by the subtype). 

 The overriding method CAN throw any unchecked (runtime) exception, regardless of whether 
the overridden method declares the exception. (More in Chapter 5.) 

i The overriding method must NOT throw checked exceptions that are new or broader than 
those declared by the overridden method. For example, a method that declares a 
FileNotFoundException cannot be overridden by a method that declares a SQLException, 
Exception, or any other nonruntime exception unless its a subclass of FileNotFoundException. 

m The overriding method can throw narrower or fewer exceptions. Just because an overridden 
method takes risks doesnt mean that the overriding subtypes exception takes the same risks. 
Bottom line: an overriding method doesnt have to declare any exceptions that it will never throw, 
regardless of what the overridden method declares. 

You cannot override a method marked final. 

 You cannot override a method marked static. Well look at an example in a few pages when 
we discuss static methods in more detail. 

 If a method cant be inherited, you cannot override it. Remember that overriding implies that 
youre reimplementing a method you inherited! For example, the following code is not legal, and 
even if you added an eat () method to Horse, it wouldnt be an override of Animals eat () 
method: 

public class TestAnimals { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Horse h = new Horse(); 

h.eat () ; // Not legal because Horse didn't inherit eat () 

} 

} 

class Animal { 

private void eat() { 

System.out.println("Generic Animal Eating Generically"); 

} 

} 

class Horse extends Animal { } 

Invoking a Supertype Version of an Overridden Method 

Often, youll want to take advantage of some of the code in the supertype version of a method, yet still 
override it to provide some additional specific behavior. Its like saying, Run the supertype version of 
the method, and then come back down here and finish with my subtype additional method code. (Note 
that theres no requirement that the supertype version run before the subtype code.) Its easy to do in code 
using the keyword super as follows: 


public class Animal { 
public void eat() { } 

public void printYourself() { 

// Useful printing code goes here 

} 

} 

class Horse extends Animal { 
public void printYourself() { 

// Take advantage of Animal code, then add some more 
super.printYourself() ; // Invoke the superclass 

// (Animal) code 

// Then do Horse-specific 

// print work here 

} 

} 

In a similar way, you can access an interfaces overridden method with the syntax: 

InterfaceX.super.doStuff(); 

Note: Using super to invoke an overridden method applies only to instance methods. (Remember that 
static methods cant be overridden.) And you can use super only to access a method in a types 
supertype, not the supertype of the supertypethat is, you cannot say super. super. doStuff () and you 
cannot say: InterfaceX.super . super . doStuff (). 



Jatch 


If a method is overridden but you use a polymorphic (supertype) reference to refer to the 
subtype object with the overriding method, the compiler assumes youre calling the supertype 
version of the method. If the supertype version declares a checked exception, but the overriding 
subtype method does not, the compiler still thinks you are calling a method that declares an 
exception (more in Chapter 5). Lets look at an example: 

class Animal { 

public void eat() throws Exception { 

// throws an Exception 

} 

} 

class Dog2 extends Animal { 

public void eat() { /* no Exceptions */} 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Animal a = new Dog2(); 

Dog2 d = new Dog2(); 

d.eat(); // ok 

a.eat(); // compiler error - 

// unreported exception 

} 

} 


This code will not compile because of the exception declared on the Animal eat() method. 





This happens even though, at runtime, the eat() method used would be the Dog version, which 
does not declare the exception. 


Examples of Illegal Method Overrides 

Lets take a look at overriding the eat () method of Animal: 

public class Animal { 
public void eat() { } 

} 


Table 2-2 lists examples of illegal overrides of the Animal eat () method, given the preceding 
version of the Animal class. 


TABLE 2-2 


Examples of Illegal Overrides 


Illegal Override Code 

Problem with the Code 

private void eat() { } 

Access modifier more restrictive 

public void eat() throws 

Declares a checked exception not defined by superclass 

IOException { } 

version 

public void eat(String food) { } 

A legal overload, not an override, because the argument 
list changed 

public String eat() { } 

Not an override because of the return type, and not 
an overload either because there's no change in the 
argument list 


Overloaded Methods 

Over loaded methods let you reuse the same method name in a class, but with different arguments (and, 
optionally, a different return type). Overloading a method often means youre being a little nicer to those 
who call your methods because your code takes on the burden of coping with different argument types 
rather than forcing the caller to do conversions prior to invoking your method. The rules arent too 
complex: 


 Overloaded methods MUST change the argument list. 

 Overloaded methods CAN change the return type. 

 Overloaded methods CAN change the access modifier. 

 Overloaded methods CAN declare new or broader checked exceptions. 

 A method can be overloaded in the same type or in a subtype. In other words, if class A 
defines a doStuff (int i) method, the subclass B could define a doStuff (String s) method 
without overriding the superclass version that takes an int. So two methods with the same name 
but in different types can still be considered overloaded if the subtype inherits one version of the 













method and then declares another overloaded version in its type definition. 



atch 


Less experienced Java developers are often confused about the subtle differences between 
overloaded and overridden methods. Be careful to recognize when a method is overloaded 
rather than overridden. You might see a method that appears to be violating a rule for 
overriding, but that is actually a legal overload, as follows: 

public class Foo { 

public void doStuff(int y, String s) { } 
public void moreThings(int x) { } 

} 

class Bar extends Foo { 

public void doStuff(int y, long s) throws IOException { } 

} 

Its tempting to see the IOException as the problem because the overridden doStuff () method 
doesnt declare an exception and IOException is checked by the compiler. But the doStuff () 
method is not overridden! Subclass Bar overloads the doStuff () method by varying the 
argument list, so the IOException is fine. 


Legal Overloads 

Lets look at a method we want to overload: 

public void changeSize(int size, String name, float pattern) { } 

The following methods are legal overloads of the changeSize () method: 

public void changeSize(int size, String name) { } 

private int changeSize(int size, float pattern) { } 

public void changeSize(float pattern, String name) 

throws IOException { } 


Invoking Overloaded Methods 

In Chapter 6 we will look at how boxing and var-args impact overloading. (You still have to pay attention 
to whats covered here, however.) 

When a method is invoked, more than one method of the same name might exist for the object type 
youre invoking a method on. For example, the Horse class might have three methods with the same name 
but with different argument lists, which means the method is overloaded. 

Deciding which of the matching methods to invoke is based on the arguments. If you invoke the method 
with a St ring argument, the overloaded version that takes astringis called. If you invoke a method of 
the same name but pass it a float, the overloaded version that takes a float will run. If you invoke the 
method of the same name but pass it a Foo object, and there isnt an overloaded version that takes a Foo, 
then the compiler will complain that it cant find a match. The following are examples of invoking 




overloaded methods: 


class Adder { 

public int addThem(int x, int y) { 
return x + y; 

} 

// Overload the addThem method to add doubles instead of ints 
public double addThem(double x, double y) { 
return x + y; 

} 

} 

// From another class, invoke the addThem() method 
public class TestAdder { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Adder a = new Adder(); 
int b = 27; 
int c = 3; 

int result = a.addThem(b,c); // Which addThem is invoked? 

double doubleResult = a.addThem(22.5,9.3); // Which addThem? 

} 

} 

In this TestAdder code, the first call to a. addThem(b, c) passes two ints to the method, so the first 
version of addThem ()the overloaded version that takes two int argumentsis called. The second call 
to a. addThem(22.5, 9.3) passes two doubles to the method, so the second version of addThem()the 
overloaded version that takes two double argumentsis called. 

Invoking overloaded methods that take object references rather than primitives is a little more 
interesting. Say you have an overloaded method such that one version takes an Animal and one takes a 
Horse (subclass of Animal). If you pass a Horse object in the method invocation, youll invoke the 
overloaded version that takes a Horse. Or so it looks at first glance: 

class Animal { } 

class Horse extends Animal { } 

class UseAnimals { 

public void doStuff(Animal a) { 

System.out.printIn("In the Animal version"); 

} 

public void doStuff(Horse h) { 

System.out.println("In the Horse version"); 

} 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

UseAnimals ua = new UseAnimals(); 

Animal animalObj = new Animal(); 

Horse horseObj = new Horsed ; 
ua.doStuff(animalObj); 
ua.doStuff(horseObj); 

} 

} 

The output is what you expect: 


In the Animal version 


In the Horse version 


But what if you use an Animal reference to a Horse object? 

Animal animalRefToHorse = new Horse(); 
ua.doStuff(animalRefToHorse); 

Which of the overloaded versions is invoked? You might want to answer, The one that takes a Horse 
since its a Horse object at runtime thats being passed to the method. But thats not how it works. The 
preceding code would actually print this: 

in the Animal version 

Even though the actual object at runtime is a Horse and not an Animal, the choice of which overloaded 
method to call (in other words, the signature of the method) is NOT dynamically decided at runtime. 

Just remember that the reference type (not the object type) determines which overloaded method is 
invoked! 

To summarize, which over ridden version of the method to call (in other words, from which class 
in the inheritance tree) is decided at runtime based on object type, but which over loaded version of 
the method to call is based on the reference type of the argument passed at compile time. 

If you invoke a method passing it an Animal reference to a Horse object, the compiler knows only 
about the Animal, so it chooses the overloaded version of the method that takes an Animal. It does not 
matter that, at runtime, a Horse is actually being passed. 



 a t c h 


Can main() be overloaded? 

class DuoMain { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
main(1); 

} 

static void main(int i) { 

System.out.println("overloaded main"); 

} 

} 

Absolutely! But the only main () with JVM superpowers is the one with the signature youve 
seen about 100 times already in this book. 


Polymorphism in Overloaded and Overridden Methods How does polymorphism work 
with overloaded methods? From what we just looked at, it doesnt appear that polymorphism matters 
when a method is overloaded. If you pass an Animal reference, the overloaded method that takes an 
Animal will be invoked, even if the actual object passed is a Horse. Once the Horse masquerading as 
Animal gets in to the method, however, the Horse object is still a Horse despite being passed into a 
method expecting an Animal. So its true that polymorphism doesnt determine which overloaded version 




is called; however, polymorphism does come into play when the decision is about which overridden 
version of a method is called. But sometimes a method is both overloaded and overridden. Imagine that 
the Animal and Horse classes look like this: 

public class Animal { 
public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Generic Animal Eating Generically"); 

} 

} 

public class Horse extends Animal { 
public void eat() { 

System.out.println("Horse eating hay ") ; 

} 

public void eat(String s) { 

System.out.println("Horse eating " + s); 

} 

} 

Notice that the Horse class has both overloaded and overridden the eat () method. Table 2-3 shows 
which version of the three eat () methods will run depending on how they are invoked. 


TABLE 2-3 


Examples of Legal and Illegal Overrides 


Method Invocation Code 

Result 

Animal a = new Animal(); 
a.eat () ; 

Generic Animal Eating Generically 

Horse h = new Horse(); 
h.eat () ; 

Horse eating hay 

Animal ah = new Horse(); 
ah.eat(); 

Horse eating hay 

Polymorphism worksthe actual object type (Horse), not the 

reference type (Animal), is used to determine which eat ( ) 
is called. 

Horse he = new Horse (); 
he.eat ( "Apples" ); 

Horse eating Apples 

The overloaded eat (String s ) method is invoked. 

Animal a2 = new Animal (); 
a2.eat("treats") ; 

Compiler error! Compiler sees that the Animal class doesn't have 
an eat () method that takes a String. 

Animal ah2 = new Horse (); 
ah2.eat("Carrots") ; 

Compiler error! Compiler still looks only at the reference and 
sees that Animal doesn't have an eat () method that takes a 
String. Compiler doesn't care that the actual object might be 
a Horse at runtime. 















Dont be fooled by a method thats overloaded but not overridden by a subclass. Its perfectly 
legal to do the following: 

public class Foo { 
void doStuff() { } 

} 

class Bar extends Foo { 

void doStuff(String s) { } 

} 

The Bar class has two doStuff () methods: the no-arg version it inherits from Foo (and does 
not override) and the overloaded doStuff (String s) defined in the Bar class. Code with a 
reference to a Foo can invoke only the no-arg version , but code with a reference to a Bar can 
invoke either of the overloaded versions. 


Table 2-4 summarizes the difference between overloaded and overridden methods. 


TABLE 2-4 


Differences Between Overloaded and Overridden Methods 



Overloaded Method 

Overridden Method 

Argument(s) 

Must change. 

Must not change. 

Return type 

Can change. 

Can't change except for covariant 
returns. (Covered later this chapter.) 

Exceptions 

Can change. 

Can reduce or eliminate. Must not 
throw new or broader checked 
exceptions. 

Access 

Can change. 

Must not make more restrictive (can 
be less restrictive). 

Invocation 

Reference type determines which overloaded 
version (based on declared argument types) is 
selected. Happens at compile time. The actual 
method that's invoked is still a virtual method 
invocation that happens at runtime, but the 
compiler will already know the signature of the 
method to be invoked. So at runtime, the argument 
match will already have been nailed down, just not 
the class in which the method lives. 

Object type (in other words, the 
type of the actual instance on the 
heap ) determines which method is 
selected. Happens at runtime. 


Well cover constructor overloading later in the chapter, where well also cover the other constructor- 
related topics that are on the exam. Figure 2-4 illustrates the way overloaded and overridden methods 
appear in class relationships. 














Overriding 


Overloading 


Tree 


Tree 


showLeavesj) 

setFeatures(String name) 





Oak 


Oak 

showLeavesO 


setFeatures(String name, int leafSize) 



setFeatures(int leafSize) 


Overloaded and overridden methods in class relationships 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Casting (OCA Objectives 2.2 and 7.3) 

2.2 Differentiate between object reference variables and primitive variables. 

7.3 Determine when casting is necessary. 

Youve seen how its both possible and common to use general reference variable types to refer to 
more specific object types. Its at the heart of polymorphism. For example, this line of code should be 
second nature by now: 

Animal animal = new Dog(); 

But what happens when you want to use that animal reference variable to invoke a method that only 












class Dog has? You know its referring to a Dog, and you want to do a Dog-specific thing? In the following 
code, weve got an array of Animals, and whenever we find a Dog in the array, we want to do a special 
Dog thing. Lets agree for now that all this code is okay, except that were not sure about the line of code 
that invokes the playDead method. 

class Animal { 

void makeNoiseO {System.out.println("generic noise"); } 

} 

class Dog extends Animal { 

void makeNoiseO {System.out.println("bark"); } 

void playDeadO { System.out.println("roll over"); } 

} 


class CastTest2 { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Animal [] a = {new Animal(), new Dog(), new Animal() }; 

for(Animal animal : a) { 
animal.makeNoise() ; 
if(animal instanceof Dog) { 

animal.playDead(); // try to do a Dog behavior? 

} 

} 

} 

} 

When we try to compile this code, the compiler says something like this: 
cannot find symbol 

The compiler is saying, Hey, class Animal doesnt have a playDead ( ) method. Lets modify the if 
code block: 


if(animal instanceof Dog) { 

Dog d = (Dog) animal; // casting the ref. var. 

d.playDead(); 

} 


The new and improved code block contains a cast, which in this case is sometimes called a downcast, 
because were casting down the inheritance tree to a more specific class. Now the compiler is happy. 
Before we try to invoke playDead, we cast the animal variable to type Dog. What were saying to the 
compiler is, We know its really referring to a Dog object, so its okay to make a new Dog reference 
variable to refer to that object. In this case were safe, because before we ever try the cast, we do an 
instanceof test to make sure. 

Its important to know that the compiler is forced to trust us when we do a downcast, even when we 
screw up: 

class Animal { } 

class Dog extends Animal { } 

class DogTest { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Animal animal = new Animal(); 

Dog d = (Dog) animal; // compiles but fails later 

} 


} 


It can be maddening! This code compiles! But when we try to run it, well get an exception, something 
like this: 

java.lang.ClassCastException 

Why cant we trust the compiler to help us out here? Cant it see that animal is of type Animal? All 
the compiler can do is verify that the two types are in the same inheritance tree, so that depending on 
whatever code might have come before the downcast, its possible that animal is of type Dog. The 
compiler must allow things that might possibly work at runtime. However, if the compiler knows with 
certainty that the cast could not possibly work, compilation will fail. The following replacement code 
block will NOT compile: 

Animal animal = new Animal(); 

Dog d = (Dog) animal; 

String s = (String) animal; // animal can't EVER be a String 

In this case, youll get an error like this: 

inconvertible types 

Unlike downcasting, upcasting (casting up the inheritance tree to a more general type) works 
implicitiy (that is, you dont have to type in the cast) because when you upcast youre implicidy 
restricting the number of methods you can invoke, as opposed to downcasting, which implies that later on, 
you might want to invoke a more specific method. Heres an example: 

class Animal { } 

class Dog extends Animal { } 

class DogTest { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Dog d = new Dog(); 

Animal al = d; // upcast ok with no explicit cast 

Animal a2 = (Animal) d; // upcast ok with an explicit cast 

} 

} 

Both of the previous upcasts will compile and run without exception because a Dog IS-A(n) Animal, 
which means that anything an Animal can do, a Dog can do. A Dog can do more, of course, but the point is 
that anyone with an Animal reference can safely call Animal methods on a Dog instance. The Animal 
methods may have been overridden in the Dog class, but all we care about now is that a Dog can always 
do at least everything an Animal can do. The compiler and JVM know it, too, so the implicit upcast is 
always legal for assigning an object of a subtype to a reference of one of its supertype classes (or 
interfaces). If Dog implements Pet and Pet defines beFriendly( ), then a Dog can be implicitly cast to a 
Pet, but the only Dog method you can invoke then is beFriendly (), which Dog was forced to implement 
because Dog implements the Pet interface. 

One more thing...if Dog implements Pet, then, if Beagle extends Dog but Beagle does not declare that 
it implements Pet, Beagle is still a Pet! Beagle is a Pet simply because it extends Dog, and Dogs 
already taken care of the Pet parts for itself and for all its children. The Beagle class can always 
override any method it inherits from Dog, including methods that Dog implemented to fulfill its interface 
contract. 


And just one more thing.. .if Beagle does declare that it implements Pet, just so that others looking at 
the Beagle class API can easily see that Beagle IS-A Pet without having to look at Beagles 
superclasses, Beagle still doesnt need to implement the beFriendly () method if the Dog class 
(Beagles superclass) has already taken care of that. In other words, if Beagle IS-A Dog, and Dog IS-A 
Pet, then Beagle IS-A Pet and has already met its Pet obligations for implementing the beFriendly () 
method since it inherits the beFriendly () method. The compiler is smart enough to say, I know Beagle 
already IS a Dog, but its okay to make it more obvious by adding a cast. 

So dont be fooled by code that shows a concrete class that declares it implements an interface but 
doesnt implement the methods of the interface. Before you can tell whether the code is legal, you must 
know what the supertypes of this implementing class have declared. If any supertype in its inheritance tree 
has already provided concrete (that is, nonabstract) method implementations, then regardless of whether 
the supertype declares that it implements the interface, the subclass is under no obligation to reimplement 
(override) those methods. 



 a t c h 


The exam creators will tell you that they're forced to jam tons of code into little spaces 
"because of the exam engine." Although that's partially true, they ALSO like to obfuscate. The 
following code 

Animal a = new Dog(); 

Dog d = (Dog) a; 
d.doDogStuff(); 

can be replaced with this easy-to-read bit of fun: 

Animal a = new Dog() ; 

((Dog)a).doDogStuff(); 

In this case the compiler needs all those parentheses; otherwise, it thinks it's been handed an 
incomplete statement. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Implementing an Interface (OCA Objective 7.5) 

7.5 Use abstract classes and interfaces. 

When you implement an interface, youre agreeing to adhere to the contract defined in the interface. 
That means youre agreeing to provide legal implementations for every abstract method defined in the 
interface, and that anyone who knows what the interface methods look like (not how theyre implemented, 
but how they can be called and what they return) can rest assured that they can invoke those methods on an 
instance of your implementing class. 

For example, if you create a class that implements the Runnable interface (so that your code can be 





executed by a specific thread), you must provide the public void run () method. Otherwise, the poor 
thread could be told to go execute your Runnable objects code andsurprise, surprisethe thread then 
discovers the object has no r un () method! (At which point, the thread would blow up and the JVM 
would crash in a spectacular yet horrible explosion.) Thankfully, Java prevents this meltdown from 
occurring by running a compiler check on any class that claims to implement an interface. If the class says 
its implementing an interface, it darn well better have an implementation for each abstract method in the 
interface (with a few exceptions that well look at in a moment). 

Assuming an interface Bounceable with two methods, bounce () and setBounceFactor (), the 
following class will compile: 

public class Ball implements Bounceable { // Keyword 

// 'implements' 

public void bounce() { } 

public void setBounceFactor(int bf) { } 

} 

Okay, we know what youre thinking: This has got to be the worst implementation class in the history of 
implementation classes. It compiles, though. And it runs. The interface contract guarantees that a class 
will have the method (in other words, others can call the method subject to access control), but it never 
guaranteed a good implementationor even any actual implementation code in the body of the method. 
(Keep in mind, though, that if the interface declares that a method is NOT void, your classs 
implementation code has to include a return statement.) The compiler will never say, Um, excuse me, but 
did you really mean to put nothing between those curly braces? HELLO. This is a method after all, so 
shouldnt it do something? 

Implementation classes must adhere to the same rules for method implementation as a class extending 
an abstract class. To be a legal implementation class, a nonabstract implementation class must do the 
following: 

i Provide concrete (nonabstract) implementations for all abstract methods from the declared 

interface. 

 Follow all the rules for legal overrides, such as the following: 

 Declare no checked exceptions on implementation methods other than those declared by 
the interface method or subclasses of those declared by the interface method. 

 Maintain the signature of the interface method, and maintain the same return type (or a 
subtype). (But it does not have to declare the exceptions declared in the interface method 
declaration.) 

But wait, theres more! An implementation class can itself be abstract! For example, the following is 
legal for a class Ball implementing Bounceable: 

abstract class Ball implements Bounceable { } 

Notice anything missing? We never provided the implementation methods. And thats okay. If the 
implementation class is abstract, it can simply pass the buck to its first concrete subclass. For example, 
if class BeachBall extends Ball, and BeachBall is not abstract, then BeachBall has to provide an 
implementation for all the abstract methods from Bounceable: 







 a. t c h 


Implementation classes are NOT required to implement an interfaces static or default 
methods. Well discuss this in more depth later in the chapter. 


class BeachBall extends Ball { 

// Even though we don't say it in the class declaration above, 

// BeachBall implements Bounceable, since BeachBall's abstract 
// superclass (Ball) implements Bounceable 

public void bounce() { 

// interesting BeachBall-specific bounce code 

} 

public void setBounceFactor(int bf) { 

// clever BeachBall-specific code for setting 
// a bounce factor 

} 

// if class Ball defined any abstract methods, 

// they'll have to be 
// implemented here as well. 

} 

Look for classes that claim to implement an interface but dont provide the correct method 
implementations. Unless the implementing class is abstract, the implementing class must provide 
implementations for all abstract methods defined in the interface. 

You need to know two more rules, and then we can put this topic to sleep (or put you to sleep; we 
always get those two confused): 

1. A class can implement more than one interface. Its perfecdy legal to say, for example, the 
following: 

public class Ball implements Bounceable, Serializable, Runnable { . . . } 

You can extend only one class, but you can implement many interfaces (which, as of Java 8, 
means a form of multiple inheritance, which well discuss shordy). In other words, subclassing 
defines who and what you are, whereas implementing defines a role you can play or a hat you can 
wear, despite how different you might be from some other class implementing the same interface 
(but from a different inheritance tree). For example, a Person extends HumanBeing (although for 
some, thats debatable). But a Person may also implement Programmer, Snowboarder, Employee, 
Parent, or PersonCrazyEnoughToTakeThisExam. 

2. An interface can itself extend another interface. The following code is perfecdy legal: 
public interface Bounceable extends Moveable { } // ok! 

What does that mean? The first concrete (nonabstract) implementation class of Bounceable must 





implement all the abstract methods of Bounceable, plus all the abstract methods of Moveable! The 
subinterface, as we call it, simply adds more requirements to the contract of the superinterface. Youll see 
this concept applied in many areas of Java, especially Java EE, where youll often have to build your 
own interface that extends one of the Java EE interfaces. 

Hold on, though, because heres where it gets strange. An interface can extend more than one interface! 
Think about that for a moment. You know that when were talking about classes, the following is illegal: 

public class Programmer extends Employee, Geek { } // Illegal! 


As we mentioned earlier, a class is not allowed to extend multiple classes in Java. An interface, however, 
is free to extend multiple interfaces: 

interface Bounceable extends Moveable, Spherical { // ok! 

void bounce(); 

void setBounceFactor(int bf); 

} 

interface Moveable { 
void moveltO ; 

} 

interface Spherical { 

void doSphericalThing(); 

} 


In the next example, Ball is required to implement Bounceable, plus all abstract methods from the 
interfaces that Bounceable extends (including any interfaces those interfaces extend, and so on, until you 
reach the top of the stackor is it the bottom of the stack?). So Ball would need to look like the 
following: 


class Ball implements Bounceable { 

public void bounce() { } 

public void setBounceFactor(int bf) 

public void movelt() { } 

public void doSphericalThing() { } 

} 


// Implement Bounceable's methods 

{ } 

// Implement Moveable's method 
// Implement Spherical 


If class Ball fails to implement any of the abstract methods from Bounceable, Moveable, or 
Spherical, the compiler will jump up and down wildly, red in the face, until it does. Unless, that is, 
class Ball is marked abstract. In that case, Ball could choose to implement any, all, or none of the 
abstract methods from any of the interfaces, thus leaving the rest of the implementations to a concrete 
subclass of Ball, as follows: 

abstract class Ball implements Bounceable { 

public void bounce() { ... } // Define bounce behavior 

public void setBounceFactor(int bf) { ... } 

// Don't implement the rest; leave it for a subclass 

} 

class SoccerBall extends Ball { // class SoccerBall must 

// implement the interface 
// methods that Ball didn't 


} 


public void movelt() { ... } 

public void doSphericalThing() { ... } 

// SoccerBall can choose to override the Bounceable methods 
// implemented by Ball 
public void bounce() { ... } 


Figure 2-5 compares concrete and abstract examples of extends and implements for both classes and 
interfaces. 



Because BeachBall is the first concrete class to implement Bounceable, 
it must provide implementations for ail methods of Bounceable, except 
those defined in the abstract class Ball. Because Ball did not provide 
implementations of Bounceable methods, BeachBall was required to 
implement all of them. 


FIGURE 2-5 


Comparing concrete and abstract examples of extends and implements 


Java 8Now with Multiple Inheritance! 

It might have already occurred to you that since interfaces can now have concrete methods and classes 
can implement multiple interfaces, the spectre of multiple inheritance and the Deadly Diamond of Death 
can rear its ugly head! Well, youre pardy correct. A class CAN implement interfaces with duplicate, 













concrete method signatures! But the good news is that the compilers got your back, and if you DO want to 
implement both interfaces, youll have to provide an overriding method in your class. Lets look at the 
following code: 



atch 


Look for illegal uses of extends and implements. The following shows examples of legal and 
illegal class and interface declarations: 


class Foo { } 

class Bar implements Foo { } 
interface Baz { } 
interface Fi { } 

interface Fee implements Baz { } 
interface Zee implements Foo { } 
interface Zoo extends Foo { } 
interface Boo extends Fi { } 
class Toon extends Foo, Button { } 
class Zoom implements Fi, Baz { } 
interface Vroom extends Fi, Baz { } 

class Yow extends Foo implements Fi { } 
class Yow extends Foo implements Fi, Baz 


// OK 

// No! Can't implement a class 
// OK 
// OK 

// No! an interface can't 

// implement an interface 

//No! an interface can't 

// implement a class 

// No! an interface can't 

// extend a class 

// OK. An interface can extend 

// an interface 

//No! a class can't extend 

// multiple classes 

// OK. A class can implement 

// multiple interfaces 

// OK. An interface can extend 

// multiple interfaces 

// OK. A class can do both 

// (extends must be 1st) 

{ } // OK. A class can do all three 
// (extends must be 1st) 


Burn these in, and watch for abuses in the questions you get on the exam. Regardless of what 
the question appears to be testing, the real problem might be the class or interface declaration. 
Before you get caught up in, say, tracing a complex threading flow, check to see if the code will 
even compile. (Just that tip alone may be worth your putting us in your will!) (Youll be 
impressed by the effort the exam developers put into distracting you from the real problem.) 
(How did people manage to write anything before parentheses were invented?) 


interface II { 

default int doStuffO { return 1; } 

} 

interface 12 { 

default int doStuffO { return 2; } 


} 




public class Multilnt implements II, 12 { // needs to override 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
new Multilnt().go(); 

} 

void go() { 

System.out.printIn(doStuff() ) ; 

} 

// public int doStuff() { 

// return 3; 

// } 

} 

As the code stands, it WILL NOT COMPILE because its not clear which version of doStuf f () should 
be used. In order to make the code compile, you need to override doStuf f ( ) in the class. Uncommenting 
the classs doStuf f () method would allow the code to compile and when run produce the following 
output: 

3 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Legal Return Types (OCA Objectives 2.2 and 6.1) 

2.2 Differentiate between object reference variables and primitive variables. 

6.1 Create methods with arguments and return values; including overloaded methods. 

This section covers two aspects of return types: what you can declare as a return type, and what you 
can actually return as a value. What you can and cannot declare is pretty straightforward, but it all 
depends on whether youre overriding an inherited method or simply declaring a new method (which 
includes overloaded methods). Well take just a quick look at the difference between return type rules for 
overloaded and overriding methods, because weve already covered that in this chapter. Well cover a 
small bit of new ground, though, when we look at polymorphic return types and the rules for what is and 
is not legal to actually return. 


Return Type Declarations 

This section looks at what youre allowed to declare as a return type, which depends primarily on 
whether you are overriding, overloading, or declaring a new method. 

Return Types on Overloaded Methods 

Remember that method overloading is not much more than name reuse. The overloaded method is a 
completely different method from any other method of the same name. So if you inherit a method but 
overload it in a subtype, youre not subject to the restrictions of overriding, which means you can declare 
any return type you like. What you cant do is change only the return type. To overload a method, 
remember, you must change the argument list. The following code shows an overloaded method: 



public class Foo{ 
void go() { } 

} 

public class Bar extends Foo { 

String go(int x) { 
return null; 

} 

} 

Notice that the Bar version of the method uses a different return type. Thats perfecdy fine. As long as 
youve changed the argument list, youre overloading the method, so the return type doesnt have to match 
that of the supertype version. What youre NOT allowed to do is this: 

public class Foo{ 
void go() { } 

} 

public class Bar extends Foo { 

String go() { // Not legal! Can't change only the return type 
return null; 

} 

} 

Overriding and Return Types and Covariant Returns 

When a subtype wants to change the method implementation of an inherited method (an override), the 
subtype must define a method that matches the inherited version exacdy. Or, since Java 5, youre allowed 
to change the return type in the overriding method as long as the new return type is a subtype of the 
declared return type of the overridden (superclass) method. 

Lets look at a covariant return in action: 

class Alpha { 

Alpha doStuff(char c) { 
return new Alpha(); 

} 

} 

class Beta extends Alpha { 

Beta doStuff(char c) { // legal override since Java 1.5 

return new Beta(); 

} 

} 

Since Java 5, this code compiles. If you were to attempt to compile this code with a 1.4 compiler or with 
the source flag as follows, 

javac -source 1.4 Beta.java 

you would get a compiler error like this: 

attempting to use incompatible return type 

Other rules apply to overriding, including those for access modifiers and declared exceptions, but 
those rules arent relevant to the return type discussion. 




 A t c h 


For the exam, be sure you know that overloaded methods can change the return type , but 
overriding methods can do so only within the bounds of covariant returns. Just that knowledge 
alone will help you through a wide range of exam questions. 


Returning a Value 

You have to remember only six rules for returning a value: 

1. You can return null in a method with an object reference return type. 

public Button doStuffO { 
return null; 

} 

2. An array is a perfectly legal return type. 

public String [] go () { 

return new String [] {"Fred", "Barney", "Wilma"}; 

} 

3. In a method with a primitive return type, you can return any value or variable that can be 
implicitiy converted to the declared return type. 

public int foo() { 
char c = 1 c'; 

return c; // char is compatible with int 

} 

4. In a method with a primitive return type, you can return any value or variable that can be 
explicidy cast to the declared return type. 

public int foo() { 
float f = 32.5f; 
return (int) f; 

} 

5. You must not return anything from a method with a void return type. 

public void bar() { 

return "this is it"; // Not legal!! 

} 

6. In a method with an object reference return type, you can return any object type that can be 
implicitly cast to the declared return type. 





public Animal getAnimal() { 

return new Horsed; // Assume Horse extends Animal 

} 

public Object getObjectO { 
int[] nums = {1,2,3}; 

return nums; // Return an int array, which is still an object 

} 

public interface Chewable { } 

public class Gum implements Chewable { } 

public class TestChewable { 

// Method with an interface return type 
public Chewable getChewable() { 

return new Gum(); // Return interface implementer 

} 

} 



 a t c h 


Watch for methods that declare an abstract class or interface return type, and know that any 
object that passes the IS-A test (in other words, would test true using the instanceof operator) 
can be returned from that method. For example: 

public abstract class Animal { } 

public class Bear extends Animal { } 
public class Test { 
public Animal go() { 

return new Bear(); // OK, Bear "is-a" Animal 

} 

} 

This code will compile, and the return value is a subtype. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Constructors and Instantiation 
(OCA Objectives 6.3 and 7.4) 

6.3 Create and overload constructors; including impact on default constructors (sic) 

7.4 Use super and this to access objects and constructors. 

Objects are constructed. You CANNOT make a new object without invoking a constructor. In fact, you 
cant make a new object without invoking not just the constructor of the objects actual class type, but also 
the constructor of each of its superclasses! Constructors are the code that runs whenever you use the 





keyword new. (Okay, to be a bit more accurate, there can also be initialization blocks that run when you 
say new, and were going to cover in it blocks and their static initialization counterparts after we discuss 
constructors.) Weve got plenty to talk about herewell look at how constructors are coded, who codes 
them, and how they work at runtime. So grab your hardhat and a hammer, and lets do some object 
building. 


Constructor Basics 

Every class, including abstract classes, MUST have a constructor. Burn that into your brain. But just 
because a class must have a constructor doesnt mean the programmer has to type it. A constructor looks 
like this: 

class Foo { 

Foo() { } // The constructor for the Foo class } 

Notice whats missing? Theres no return type! Two key points to remember about constructors are 
that they have no return type, and their names must exactly match the class name. Typically, 
constructors are used to initialize the instance variable state, as follows: 

class Foo { 

int size; 

String name; 

Foo(String name, int size) { 
this.name = name; 
this.size = size; 

} 

} 

In the preceding code example, the Foo class does not have a no-arg constructor. That means the 
following will fail to compile: 

Foo f = new Foo(); // Won't compile, no matching constructor 
but the following will compile: 

Foo f = new Foo("Fred", 43); // No problem. Arguments match 

// the Foo constructor. 

So its very common (and desirable) for a class to have a no-arg constructor, regardless of how 
many other overloaded constructors are in the class (yes, constructors can be overloaded). You 
cant always make that work for your classes; occasionally you have a class where it makes no 
sense to create an instance without supplying information to the constructor. A java. awt. Color 
object, for example, cant be created by calling a no-arg constructor, because that would be like 
saying to the JVM, "Make me a new Color object, and I really dont care what color it is...you 
pick. Do you seriously want the JVM making your style decisions? 


Constructor Chaining 

We know that constructors are invoked at runtime when you say new on some class type as follows: 



Horse h = new Horse(); 


But what really happens when you say new Horse () ? (Assume Horse extends Animal and Animal 
extends Object.) 

1. The Horse constructor is invoked. Every constructor invokes the constructor of its 
superclass with an (implicit) call to super ( ), unless the constructor invokes an overloaded 
constructor of the same class (more on that in a minute). 

2. The Animal constructor is invoked (Animal is the superclass of Horse). 

3. The Object constructor is invoked (Object is the ultimate superclass of all classes, so 
class Animal extends Object even though you dont actually type extends Object into the 
Animal class declaration; its implicit.) At this point were on the top of the stack. 

4. If class Ob j ect had any instance variables, then they would be given their explicit values. 
By explicit values, we mean values that are assigned at the time the variables are declared, 
such as int x = 27, where 27 is the explicit value (as opposed to the default value) of the 
instance variable. 

5. The Object constructor completes. 

6. The Animal instance variables are given their explicit values (if any). 

7. The Animal constructor completes. 

8. The Horse instance variables are given their explicit values (if any). 

9. The Horse constructor completes. 

Figure 2-6 shows how constructors work on the call stack. 


4. Obj ect () 


3. Animal () calls super () 


2. Horse () calls super () 


I. main() calls new Horse () 


FIGURE 2-6 


Constructors on the call stack 


Rules for Constructors 

The following list summarizes the rules youll need to know for the exam (and to understand the 
rest of this section). You MUST remember these, so be sure to study them more than once. 

n Constructors can use any access modifier, including private. (A private constructor 
means only code within the class itself can instantiate an object of that type, so if the private 
constructor class wants to allow an instance of the class to be used, the class must provide a 
static method or variable that allows access to an instance created from within the class.) 

 The constructor name must match the name of the class. 







 Constructors must not have a return type. 

 Its legal (but stupid) to have a method with the same name as the class, but that doesnt 
make it a constructor. If you see a return type, its a method rather than a constructor. In 
fact, you could have both a method and a constructor with the same namethe name of the 
classin the same class, and thats not a problem for Java. Be careful not to mistake a 
method for a constructorbe sure to look for a return type. 

 If you dont type a constructor into your class code, a default constructor will be 
automatically generated by the compiler. 

 The default constructor is ALWAYS a no-arg constructor. 

 If you want a no-arg constructor and youve typed any other constructor(s) into your 
class code, the compiler wont provide the no-arg constructor (or any other constructor) for 
you. In other words, if youve typed in a constructor with arguments, you wont have a no-arg 
constructor unless you typed it in yourself! 

 Every constructor has, as its first statement, either a call to an overloaded constructor 
(this ()) or a call to the superclass constructor (super ( )), although remember that this call 
can be inserted by the compiler. 

 If you do type in a constructor (as opposed to relying on the compiler-gene rated default 
constructor), and you do not type in the call to super ( ) or a call to this (), the compiler will 
insert a no-arg call to super () for you as the very first statement in the constructor. 

 A call to super () can either be a no-arg call or can include arguments passed to the 
super constructor. 

 A no-arg constructor is not necessarily the default (that is, compiler-supplied) 
constructor, although the default constructor is always a no-arg constructor. The default 
constructor is the one the compiler provides! Although the default constructor is always a no- 
arg constructor, youre free to put in your own no-arg constructor. 

 You cannot make a call to an instance method or access an instance variable until after 
the super constructor runs. 

 Only static variables and methods can be accessed as part of the call to super () or 
this(). (Example: super(Animal. NAME) is OK, because NAME is declared as a static 
variable.) 

 Abstract classes have constructors, and those constructors are always called when a 
concrete subclass is instantiated. 

 Interfaces do not have constructors. Interfaces are not part of an objects inheritance 
tree. 

 The only way a constructor can be invoked is from within another constructor. In other 
words, you cant write code that actually calls a constructor as follows: 

class Horse { 

Horse() { } // constructor 

void doStuffO { 

Horse(); // calling the constructor - illegal! 

} 


} 


Determine Whether a Default Constructor Will Be Created 

The following example shows a Horse class with two constructors: 

class Horse { 

Horse () { } 

Horse(String name) { } 

} 

Will the compiler put in a default constructor for this class? No! 

How about for the following variation of the class? 

class Horse { 

Horse(String name) { } 

} 

Now will the compiler insert a default constructor? No! 

What about this class? 

class Horse { } 

Now were talking. The compiler will generate a default constructor for this class because the class 
doesnt have any constructors defined. 

Okay, what about this class? 

class Horse { 
void Horse() { } 

} 

It might look like the compiler wont create a constructor, since one is already in the Horse class. 
Or is it? Take another look at the preceding Horse class. 

Whats wrong with the Horse ( ) constructor? It isnt a constructor at all! Its simply a method 
that happens to have the same name as the class. Remember, the return type is a dead giveaway 
that were looking at a method, not a constructor. 

How do you know for sure whether a default constructor will be created? Because 
you didnt write any constructors in your class. 

How do you know what the default constructor will look like? Because... 

 The default constructor has the same access modifier as the class. 

 The default constructor has no arguments. 

 The default constructor includes a no-arg call to the super constructor (super ()). 

Table 2-5 shows what the compiler will (or wont) generate for your class. 


TABLE 2-5 


Compiler- Gene rated Constructor Code 



Class Code (What You Type) 

Compiler-Generated Constructor Code (in Bold) 

class Foo { } 

class Foo { 

Foo () { 
super () ; 

} 

} 

class Foo { 

Foo() { } 

} 

class Foo { 

Foo() { 

super (); 

} 

} 

public class Foo { } 

public class Foo { 

public Foo() { 
super(); 

} 

} 

class Foo { 

Foo(String s) { } 

} 

class Foo { 

Foo(String s) { 

super (); 

} 

} 

class Foo { 

Foo(String s) { 
super(); 

} 

} 

Nothing; compiler doesn't need to insert anything. 

class Foo { 
void Foo() { } 

} 

class Foo { 
void Foo() { } 

FooO { 
super (); 

} 

} 

(void FooO is a method, not a constructor.) 


What happens if the super constructor has arguments? Constructors can have 
arguments just as methods can, and if you try to invoke a method that takes, say, an int, but you 
dont pass anything to the method, the compiler will complain as follows: 











class Bar { 

void takelnt(int x) { } 

} 


class UseBar { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Bar b = new Bar(); 

b.takelntO; // Try to invoke a no-arg takelntO method 

} 

} 

The compiler will complain that you cant invoke takelnt () without passing an int. Of course, 
the compiler enjoys the occasional riddle, so the message it spits out on some versions of the JVM 
(your mileage may vary) is less than obvious: 

UseBar.java:7: takelnt(int) in Bar cannot be applied to () 

b.takelnt(); 

A 

But you get the idea. The bottom line is that there must be a match for the method And by match, 
we mean the argument types must be able to accept the values or variables youre passing and in 
the order youre passing them. Which brings us back to constructors (and here you were thinking 
wed never get there), which work exactly the same way. 

So if your super constructor (that is, the constructor of your immediate superclass/parent) has 
arguments, you must type in the call to super (), supplying the appropriate arguments. Crucial 
point: if your superclass does not have a no-arg constructor, you must type a constructor in your 
class (the subclass) because you need a place to put in the call to super () with the appropriate 
arguments. 

The following is an example of the problem: 

class Animal { 

Animal(String name) { } 

} 


class Horse extends Animal { 

Horse () { 

super(); // Problem! 

} 

} 

And once again the compiler treats us with stunning lucidity: 

Horse.java:7: cannot resolve symbol 
symbol : constructor Animal () 
location: class Animal 
super(); // Problem! 

A 

If youre lucky (and its a full moon), your compiler might be a little more explicit. But again, the 
problem is that there just isnt a match for what were trying to invoke with super ()an Animal 
constructor with no arguments. 

Another way to put this is that if your superclass does not have a no-arg constructor, then in your 
subclass you will not be able to use the default constructor supplied by the compiler. Its that simple. 


Because the compiler can only put in a call to a no-arg super (), you wont even be able to compile 
something like this: 

class Clothing { 

Clothing(String s) { } 

} 

class TShirt extends Clothing { } 


Trying to compile this code gives us exactly the same error we got when we put a constructor in 
the subclass with a call to the no-arg version of super (): 

Clothing.java:4: cannot resolve symbol 
symbol : constructor Clothing () 
location: class Clothing 
class TShirt extends Clothing { } 


In fact, the preceding Clothing and TShirt code is implicitly the same as the following code, 
where weve supplied a constructor for TShirt thats identical to the default constructor supplied 
by the compiler: 


class Clothing { 

Clothing(String s) { } 

} 

class TShirt extends Clothing { 

// Constructor identical to 
// default constructor 

TShirt() { 

super(); // Won't work! 

} // tries to invoke a no-arg 

// but there isn't one 


} 


compiler-supplied 


Clothing constructor 


One last point on the whole default constructor thing (and its probably very obvious, but we 
have to say it or well feel guilty for years), constructors are never inherited. They arent methods. 
They cant be overridden (because they arent methods, and only instance methods can be 
overridden). So the type of constructor(s) your superclass has in no way determines the type of 
default constructor youll get. Some folks mistakenly believe that the default constructor somehow 
matches the super constructor, either by the arguments the default constructor will have 
(remember, the default constructor is always a no-arg) or by the arguments used in the compiler- 
supplied call to super (). 

So although constructors cant be overridden, youve already seen that they can be overloaded, 
and typically are. 


Overloaded Constructors 

Overloading a constructor means typing in multiple versions of the constructor, each having a 
different argument list, like the following examples: 


class Foo { 

Foo() { } 

Foo(String s) { } 

} 

The preceding Foo class has two overloaded constructors: one that takes a string, and one with 
no arguments. Because theres no code in the no-arg version, its actually identical to the default 
constructor the compiler suppliesbut remember, since theres already a constructor in this class 
(the one that takes a string), the compiler wont supply a default constructor. If you want a no-arg 
constructor to overload the with-args version you already have, youre going to have to type it 
yourself, just as in the Foo example. 

Overloading a constructor is typically used to provide alternate ways for clients to instantiate 
objects of your class. For example, if a client knows the animal name, they can pass that to an 
Animal constructor that takes a string. But if they dont know the name, the client can call the no- 
arg constructor, and that constructor can supply a default name. Heres what it looks like: 

1. public class Animal { 

2. String name; 

3. Animal(String name) { 

4. this.name = name; 

5 . } 

6 . 

7. Animal () { 

8. this(makeRandomName()); 

9 . } 

10 . 

11. static String makeRandomName() { 

12. int x = (int) (Math.random() * 5); 

13. String name = new String[] {"Fluffy", "Fido", 

"Rover", "Spike", 

"Gigi"}[x]; 

14. return name; 

15. } 

16 . 

17. public static void main (String [] args) { 

18. Animal a = new Animal(); 

19. System.out.printIn(a.name); 

20. Animal b = new Animal("Zeus"); 

21. System.out.printIn(b.name); 

22. } 

23 . } 

Running the code four times produces this output: 

% java Animal 

Gigi 

Zeus 


% java Animal 

Fluffy 

Zeus 

% java Animal 

Rover 

Zeus 

% java Animal 

Fluffy 

Zeus 

Theres a lot going on in the preceding code. Figure 2-7 shows the call stack for constructor 
invocations when a constructor is overloaded. 


4. Obj ect () 


3. Animal (String s) calls super () 


2. Animal () calls this (randomlyChosenNameString) 


I. main () calls new Animal () 


FIGURE 2-7 


Overloaded constructors on the call stack 


Take a look at the call stack, and then lets walk through the code straight from the top. 

 Line 2 Declare a string instance variable name. 

 Lines 3-5 Constructor that takes a string and assigns it to instance variable name. 

 Line 7 Heres where it gets fun. Assume every animal needs a name, but the client 
(calling code) might not always know what the name should be, so the Animal class will assign 
a random name. The no-arg constructor generates a name by invoking the makeRandomName() 
method. 

 Line 8 The no-arg constructor invokes its own overloaded constructor that takes a 
String, in effect calling it the same way it would be called if client code were doing a new to 
instantiate an object, passing it a string for the name. The overloaded invocation uses the 
keyword this, but uses it as though it were a method named this (). So line 8 is simply 
calling the constructor on line 3, passing it a randomly selected string rather than a client- 
code chosen name. 

 Line 11 Notice that the makeRandomName( ) method is marked static! Thats because 
you cannot invoke an instance (in other words, nonstatic) method (or access an instance 
variable) until after the super constructor has run. And since the super constructor will be 
invoked from the constructor online 3, rather than from the one online 7, line 8 can use only 
a static method to generate the name. If we wanted all animals not specifically named by the 
caller to have the same default name, say, "Fred, then line 8 could have read this ("Fred"); 
rather than calling a method that returns a string with the randomly chosen name. 







 Line 12 This doesnt have anything to do with constructors, but since were all here to 
learn, it generates a random integer between 0 and 4. 

 Line 13 Weird syntax, we know. Were creating a new string object (just a single 
String instance), but we want the string to be selected randomly from a list. Except we dont 
have the list, so we need to make it. So in that one line of code we 

1. Declare a string variable name. 

2. Create a string array (anonymouslywe dont assign the array itself to a variable). 

3. Retrieve the string at index [x] (x being the random number generated on line 12) of 
the newly created string array. 

4. Assign the string retrieved from the array to the declared instance variable name. We 
could have made it much easier to read if wed just written 

String[] nameList = {"Fluffy", "Fido", "Rover", "Spike", 

"Gigi"}; 

String name = nameList[x]; 

But wheres the fun in that? Throwing in unusual syntax (especially for code wholly 
unrelated to the real question) is in the spirit of the exam. Dont be startled! (Okay, be 
startled, but then just say to yourself, "Whoa! and get on with it.) 

n Line 18 Were invoking the no-arg version of the constructor (causing a random name 
from the list to be passed to the other constructor). 

 Line 20 Were invoking the overloaded constructor that takes a string representing the 
name. 

The key point to get from this code example is inline 8. Rather than calling super( ), were 
calling this( ), and this( ) always means a call to another constructor in the same class. Okay, fine, 
but what happens after the call to this() ? Sooner or later the super () constructor gets called, 
right? Yes, indeed. A call to this( ) just means youre delaying the inevitable. Some constructor, 
somewhere, must make the call to super (). 

Key Rule: The first line in a constructor must be a call to super()or a call to this(). 

No exceptions. If you have neither of those calls in your constructor, the compiler will insert the no- 
arg call to super (). In other words, if constructor A( ) has a call to this (), the compiler knows that 
constructor A( ) will not be the one to invoke super (). 

The preceding rule means a constructor can never have both a call to super () and a call to 
this( ). Because each of those calls must be the first statement in a constructor, you cant legally 
use both in the same constructor. That also means the compiler will not put a call to super () in any 
constructor that has a call to this () . 

Thought question: What do you think will happen if you try to compile the following code? 


class A { 

A() { 

this("foo"); 

} 

A(String s) { 
this () ; 

} 

} 

Your compiler may not actually catch the problem (it varies depending on your compiler, but most 
wont catch the problem). It assumes you know what youre doing. Can you spot the flaw? Given 
that a super constructor must always be called, where would the call to super () go? Remember, 
the compiler wont put in a default constructor if youve already got one or more constructors in 
your class. And when the compiler doesnt put in a default constructor, it still inserts a call to 
super () in any constructor that doesnt explicitly have a call to the super constructorunless, that 
is, the constructor already has a call to this (). So in the preceding code, where can super () go? 
The only two constructors in the class both have calls to this (), and, in fact, youll get exactly what 
youd get if you typed the following method code: 

public void go() { 
doStuff(); 

} 

public void doStuff() { 

go(); 

} 

Now can you see the problem? Of course you can. The stack explodes! It gets higher and higher 
and higher until it just bursts open and method code goes spilling out, oozing out of the JVM right 
onto the floor. Two overloaded constructors both calling this() are two constructors calling each 
otherover and over and over, resulting in this: 

% java A 

Exception in thread "main" java.lang.StackOverflowError 

The benefit of having overloaded constructors is that you offer flexible ways to instantiate 
objects from your class. The benefit of having one constructor invoke another overloaded 
constructor is to avoid code duplication. In the Animal example, there wasnt any code other than 
setting the name, but imagine if after line 4 there was still more work to be done in the constructor. 
By putting all the other constructor work in just one constructor, and then having the other 
constructors invoke it, you dont have to write and maintain multiple versions of that other 
important constructor code. Basically, each of the other not-the-real-one overloaded constructors 
will call another overloaded constructor, passing it whatever data it needs (data the client code 
didnt supply). 

Constructors and instantiation become even more exciting (just when you thought it was safe) 
when you get to inner classes, but we know you can stand to have only so much fun in one chapter, 
and besides, you dont have to deal with inner classes until you tackle the OCP exam. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 



Initialization Blocks (OCA Objectives 1.2 and 6.3-ish) 

1.2 Define the structure of a Java class 

6.3 Create and overload constructors; including impact on default constructors 

Weve talked about two places in a class where you can put code that performs operations: 
methods and constructors. Initialization blocks are the third place in a Java program where 
operations can be performed. Static initialization blocks run when the class is first loaded, and 
instance initialization blocks run whenever an instance is created (a bit similar to a constructor). 
Lets look at an example: 

class Smalllnit { 
static int x; 
int y; 

static { x = 7 ; } // static init block 

{ y = 8; } // instance init block 

} 

As you can see, the syntax for initialization blocks is pretty terse. They dont have names, they 
cant take arguments, and they dont return anything. Astatic initialization block runs once when 
the class is first loaded. An instance initialization block runs once every time a new instance is 
created. Remember when we talked about the order in which constructor code executed? Instance 
init block code runs right after the call to super () in a constructorin other words, after all 
super constructors have run. 

You can have many initialization blocks in a class. It is important to note that unlike methods or 
constructors, the order in which initialization blocks appear in a class matters. When its time for 
initialization blocks to run, if a class has more than one, they will run in the order in which they 
appear in the class filein other words, from the top down. Based on the rules we just discussed, 
can you determine the output of the following program? 

class Init { 

Init(int x) { System.out.println("1-arg const"); } 

Init() { System.out.println("no-arg const"); } 
static { System.out.println("1st static init"); } 

{ System.out.println("1st instance init"); } 

{ System.out.println("2nd instance init"); } 
static { System.out.println("2nd static init"); } 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
new Init(); 
new Init(7) ; 

} 

} 

To figure this out, remember these rules: 

i init blocks execute in the order in which they appear. 

 Static init blocks run once, when the class is first loaded. 


i Instance init blocks run every time a class instance is created 
m Instance init blocks run after the constructors call to super (). 

With those rules in mind the following output should make sense: 

1st static init 
2nd static init 
1st instance init 
2nd instance init 
no-arg const 
1st instance init 
2nd instance init 
1-arg const 

As you can see, the instance init blocks each ran twice. Instance init blocks are often used as a 
place to put code that all the constructors in a class should share. That way, the code doesnt have 
to be duplicated across constructors. 

Finally, if you make a mistake in your static init block, the JVM can throw an 
ExceptionlnlnitializerError. Lets look at an example: 

class InitError { 

static int [] x = new int [4] ; 

static { x[4] = 5; } // bad array index! 

public static void main(String [] args) { } 

} 

It produces something like this: 

Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ExceptionlnlnitializerError 
Caused by: java.lang.ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException: 4 
at InitError.<clinit>(InitError.j ava:3) 



 a t c h 


By convention, init blocks usually appear near the top of the class file, somewhere around the 
constructors. However, this is the OCA exam we y re talking about. Dont be surprised if you 
find an ini t block tucked in between a couple of methods, looking for all the world like a 
compiler error waiting to happen! 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Statics (OCA Objective 6.2) 


6.2 Apply the static keyword to methods and fields. 





Static Variables and Methods 


The static modifier has such a profound impact on the behavior of a method or variable that were 
treating it as a concept entirely separate from the other modifiers. To understand the way a static 
member works, well look first at a reason for using one. Imagine youve got a utility class or 
interface with a method that always runs the same way; its sole function is to return, say, a random 
number. It wouldnt matter which instance of the class performed the methodit would always 
behave exactly the same way. In other words, the methods behavior has no dependency on the 
state (instance variable values) of an object. So why, then, do you need an object when the method 
will never be instance-specific? Why not just ask the type itself to run the method? 

Lets imagine another scenario: Suppose you want to keep a running count of all instances 
instantiated from a particular class. Where do you actually keep that variable? It wont work to 
keep it as an instance variable within the class whose instances youre tracking, because the count 
will just be initialized back to a default value with each new instance. The answer to both the 
utility-method-always-runs-the-same scenario and the keep-a-running-total-of-instances scenario is 
to use the static modifier. Variables and methods marked static belong to the type, rather than to 
any particular instance. In fact, for classes, you can use a static method or variable without having 
any instances of that class at all. You need only have the type available to be able to invoke a 
static method or access a static variable, static variables, too, can be accessed without having 
an instance of a class. But if there are instances, a static variable of a class will be shared by all 
instances of that class; there is only one copy. 

The following code declares and uses a static counter variable: 

class Frog { 

static int frogCount 

public FrogO { 
frogCount + = 1; 

} 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
new Frog(); 
new Frog(); 
new Frog(); 

System.out.printIn("Frog count is now " + frogCount); 

} 

} 

In the preceding code, the static frogCount variable is set to zero when the Frog class is first 
loaded by the JVM, before any Frog instances are created! (By the way, you dont actually need to 
initialize a static variable to zero; static variables get the same default values instance variables 
get.) Whenever a Frog instance is created, the Frog constructor runs and increments the static 
frogCount variable. When this code executes, three Frog instances are created in main (), and the 
result is 

Frog count is now 3 

Now imagine what would happen if frogCount were an instance variable (in other words, 
nonstatic): 


0; // Declare and initialize 

// static variable 


// Modify the value in the constructor 


class Frog { 

int frogCount =0; // Declare and initialize 

// instance variable 

public FrogO { 

frogCount += 1; // Modify the value in the constructor 

} 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
new Frog(); 
new Frog(); 
new Frog(); 

System.out.printIn("Frog count is now " + frogCount); 

} 

} 

When this code executes, it should still create three Frog instances in main (), but the result is...a 
compiler error! We cant get this code to compile, let alone run. 

Frog.java:11: nonstatic variable frogCount cannot be referenced 
from a static context 

System.out.printIn("Frog count is " + frogCount); 

A 

1 error 

The JVM doesnt know which Frog objects frogCount youre trying to access. The problem is 
that main() is itself a static method and thus isnt running against any particular instance of the 
class; instead its running on the class itself. A static method cant access a nonstatic (instance) 
variable because there is no instance! Thats not to say there arent instances of the class alive on 
the heap, but rather that even if there are, the static method doesnt know anything about them. 
The same applies to instance methods; a static method cant directly invoke a nonstatic method. 
Think static = class, nonstatic = instance. Making the method called by the JVM (main ()) a static 
method means the JVM doesnt have to create an instance of your class just to start running code. 



 a t c h 


One of the mistakes most often made by new Java programmers is attempting to access an 
instance variable (which means nonstatic variable) from the static main( ) method (which 
doesnt know anything about any instances, so it cant access the variable). The following code 
is an example of illegal access of a nonstatic variable from a static method: 

class Foo { 
int x = 3; 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

System.out.println("x is " + x); 

} 

} 

Understand that this code will never compile, because you cant access a nonstatic (instance) 
variable from a static method. Just think of the compiler saying, Hey, I have no idea which 
Foo objects x variable youre trying to print! Remember, its the class running the main() 





method, not an instance of the class. 

Of course, the tricky part for the exam is that the question wont look as obvious as the 
preceding code. The problem youre being tested foraccessing a nonstatic variable from a 
static methodwill be buried in code that might appear to be testing something else. For 
example, the preceding code would be more likely to appear as 

class Foo { 
int x = 3; 
float y = 4.3f; 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
for (int z = x; z < ++x; z--, y = y + z) 

// complicated looping and branching code 

} 

} 

So while youre trying to follow the logic, the real issue is that x andy cant be used within 
main() because x and y are instance, not static, variables! The same applies for accessing 
nonstatic methods from a static method. The rule is, a static method of a class cant access a 
nonstatic (instance) method or variable of its own class. 


Accessing Static Methods and Variables 

Since you dont need to have an instance in order to invoke a static method or access a static 
variable, how do you invoke or use a static member? Whats the syntax? We know that with a 
regular old instance method, you use the dot operator on a reference to an instance: 

class Frog { 

int frogSize = 0; 

public int getFrogSize() { 

return frogSize; 

} 

public Frog(int s) { 
frogSize = s; 

} 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Frog f = new Frog(25); 

System.out.printIn(f. getFrogSize ()); // Access instance 

// method using f 

} 

} 

In the preceding code, we instantiate a Frog, assign it to the reference variable f, and then use 
that f reference to invoke a method on the Frog instance we just created. In other words, the 
getFrogSize ( ) method is being invoked on a specific Frog object on the heap. 

But this approach (using a reference to an object) isnt appropriate for accessing a static 
method, because there might not be any instances of the class at all! So the way we access a static 
method (or static variable) is to use the dot operator on the type name, as opposed to using it on a 
reference to an instance, as follows: 





class Frog { 

private static int frogCount =0; // static variable 

static int getCount() { // static getter method 

return frogCount; 


} 

public Frog() { 

frogCount += 1; 

} 


// Modify the value in the constructor 


} 


class TestFrog { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
new Frog(); 


new Frog(); 
new Frog(); 
System.out 
new Froq() 


println("from static "+Frog.getCount()); // static context 


new TestFrog().go(); 

Frog f = new Frog(); 

System.out.println("use ref var "+f.getCount()); 

} 

void go() { 

System.out.println("from inst "+Frog.getCount()) 

} 


// use reference var 


// instance context 


} 


which produces the output: 

from static 3 
from instance 4 
use ref var 5 


But just to make it really confusing, the Java language also allows you to use an object reference 
variable to access a static member. Did you catch the last line of main () ? It included this 
invocation: 

f.getCount(); // Access a static using an instance variable 

In the preceding code, we instantiate a Frog, assign the new Frog object to the reference 
variable f, and then use the f reference to invoke a static method! But even though we are using a 
specific Frog instance to access the static method, the rules havent changed. This is merely a 
syntax trick to let you use an object reference variable (but not the object it refers to) to get to a 
static method or variable, but the static member is still unaware of the particular instance used 
to invoke the static member. In the Frog example, the compiler knows that the reference variable 
f is of type Frog, and so the Frog class static method is run with no awareness or concern for the 
Frog instance at the other end of the f reference. In other words, the compiler cares only that 
reference variable f is declared as type Frog. 

Invoking static methods from interfaces is almost the same as invoking static methods from 
classes, except the "instance variable syntax trick just discussed works only for static methods in 
classes. The following code demonstrates how interface static methods can and cannot be invoked: 



interface FrogBoilable { 

static int getCtoF(int cTemp) { 
return (cTemp *9/5) +32; 


// interface static method 


default String hop() { return "hopping"; } // interface default method 


public class DontBoilFrogs implements FrogBoilable { 
public static void main(String[] args) { 
new DontBoilFrogs().go(); 


void go() { 

System.out.printIn(hop()); 

// System.out.println(getCtoF(100) ) ; 


// 1 - ok for default m 

// 2 - cannot find symbol 


System.out.println(FrogBoilable.getCtoF(100)); 
DontBoilFrogs dbf = new DontBoilFrogs(); 

// System.out.println(dbf.getCtoF(100)); 


// 3 - ok for static m 


// 4 - cannot find symbol 


Lets review the code: 

 Line 1 is a legal invocation of an interfaces default method 

 Line 2 is an illegal attempt to invoke an interfaces static method 

 Line 3 is THE legal way to invoke an interfaces static method 

 Line 4 is another illegal attempt to invoke an interfaces static method 

Figure 2-8 illustrates the effects of the static modifier on methods and variables. 


static method cannot 
access an instance 
(nonstatic) variable 


class Foo 


int size = 42; 
static void doMore( ){ 
int x = sj^e ; 



class Baz 


static int count; 
static void woo( ){ 

} 

static void doMore( 

){ 

woo( ); 

int x = count; 

} 



static method cannot 
access a nonstatic 
method 


static method 
can access a static 
method or variable 


FIGURE 2-8 


The effects of static on methods and variables 


Finally, remember that static methods cant be overridden! This doesnt mean they cant 
redefined in a subclass, but redefining and overriding arent the same thing. Lets look at an 
example of a redefined (remember, not overridden) static method: 









class Animal { 

static void doStuffO { 

System.out.print("a ); 

} 

} 

class Dog extends Animal { 

static void doStuffO { // it's a redefinition, 

// not an override 

System.out.print("d " ) ; 

} 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Animal [] a = {new Animal(), new Dog(), new Animal()}; 
for(int x = 0; x < a.length; x++) { 

a[x].doStuff(); // invoke the static method 

} 

Dog.doStuff(); // invoke using the class name 

} 

} 

Running this code produces this output: 
a a a d 

Remember, the syntax a [x] . doStuf f () is just a shortcut (the syntax trick)the compiler is 
going to substitute something like Animal. doStuf f () instead Notice also that you can invoke a 
static method by using the class name. 

Notice that we didnt use the enhanced for loop here (covered in Chapter 5), even though we 
could have. Expect to see a mix of both Java 1.4 and Java 5-8 coding styles and practices on the 
exam. 


CERTIFICATION SUMMARY 

We started the chapter by discussing the importance of encapsulation in good OO design, and then 
we talked about how good encapsulation is implemented: with private instance variables and public 
getters and setters. 

Next, we covered the importance of inheritance, so that you can grasp overriding, overloading, 
polymorphism, reference casting, return types, and constructors. 

We covered IS-A and HAS-A. IS-A is implemented using inheritance, and HAS-A is implemented 
by using instance variables that refer to other objects. 

Polymorphism was next. Although a reference variables type cant be changed, it can be used to 
refer to an object whose type is a subtype of its own. We learned how to determine what methods 
are invocable for a given reference variable. 

We looked at the difference between overridden and overloaded methods, learning that an 
overridden method occurs when a subtype inherits a method from a supertype and then 
reimplements the method to add more specialized behavior. We learned that, at runtime, the JVM 
will invoke the subtype version on an instance of a subtype and the supertype version on an instance 
of the supertype. Abstract methods must be "overridden (technically, abstract methods must be 
implemented, as opposed to overridden, since there really isnt anything to override). 



We saw that overriding methods must declare the same argument list and return type or they can 
return a subtype of the declared return type of the supertypes overridden method), and that the 
access modifier cant be more restrictive. The overriding method also cant throw any new or 
broader checked exceptions that werent declared in the overridden method. You also learned that 
the overridden method can be invoked using the syntax super. doSomething ();. 

Overloaded methods let you reuse the same method name in a class, but with different 
arguments (and, optionally, a different return type). Whereas overriding methods must not change 
the argument list, overloaded methods must. But unlike overriding methods, overloaded methods 
are free to vary the return type, access modifier, and declared exceptions any way they like. 

We learned the mechanics of casting (mostly downcasting) reference variables and when its 
necessary to do so. 

Implementing interfaces came next. An interface describes a contract that the implementing 
class must follow. The rules for implementing an interface are similar to those for extending an 
abstract class. As of Java 8, interfaces can have concrete methods, which are labeled default. 
Also, remember that a class can implement more than one interface and that interfaces can extend 
another interface. 

We also looked at method return types and saw that you can declare any return type you like 
(assuming you have access to a class for an object reference return type), unless youre overriding 
a method. Barring a covariant return, an overriding method must have the same return type as the 
overridden method of the superclass. We saw that, although overriding methods must not change 
the return type, overloaded methods can (as long as they also change the argument list). 

Finally, you learned that it is legal to return any value or variable that can be implicitly converted 
to the declared return type. So, for example, a short can be returned when the return type is 
declared as an int. And (assuming Horse extends Animal), a Horse reference can be returned when 
the return type is declared an Animal. 

We covered constructors in detail, learning that if you dont provide a constructor for your class, 
the compiler will insert one. The compiler-generated constructor is called the default constructor, 
and it is always a no-arg constructor with a no-arg call to super (). The default constructor will 
never be generated if even a single constructor exists in your class (regardless of the arguments of 
that constructor); so if you need more than one constructor in your class and you want a no-arg 
constructor, youll have to write it yourself. We also saw that constructors are not inherited and 
that you can be confused by a method that has the same name as the class (which is legal). The 
return type is the giveaway that a method is not a constructor because constructors do not have 
return types. 

We saw how all the constructors in an objects inheritance tree will always be invoked when the 
object is instantiated using new. We also saw that constructors can be overloaded, which means 
defining constructors with different argument lists. A constructor can invoke another constructor of 
the same class using the keyword this( ), as though the constructor were a method named this(). 
We saw that every constructor must have either this( ) or super () as the first statement (although 
the compiler can insert it for you). 

After constructors, we discussed the two kinds of initialization blocks and how and when their 
code runs. 

We looked at static methods and variables, static members are tied to the class or interface, 
not an instance, so there is only one copy of any static member. A common mistake is to attempt to 
reference an instance variable from a static method. Use the respective class or interface name 
with the dot operator to access static members. 



And, once again, you learned that the exam includes tricky questions designed largely to test 
your ability to recognize just how tricky the questions can be. 


/ TWO-MINUTE DRILL 

Here are some of the key points from each certification objective in this chapter. 

Encapsulation, IS-A, HAS-A* (OCA Objective 6.5) 

? Encapsulation helps hide implementation behind an interface (or API). 

? Encapsulated code has two features: 

? Instance variables are kept protected (usually with the private modifier). 

? Getter and setter methods provide access to instance variables. 

? IS-A refers to inheritance or imple mentation. 

? IS-A is expressed with the keyword extends or implements. 

? IS-A, "inherits from, and "is a subtype of are all equivalent expressions. 

? HAS-A means an instance of one class "has a reference to an instance of another class 
or another instance of the same class. *HAS-A is NOT on the exam, but its good to know. 

Inheritance (OCA Objective 7.1) 

? Inheritance allows a type to be a subtype of a supertype and thereby inherit public and 
protected variables and methods of the supertype. 

? Inheritance is a key concept that underlies IS-A, polymorphism, overriding, overloading, 
and casting. 

? All classes (except class object) are subclasses of type object, and therefore they 
inherit Objects methods. 

Polymorphism (OCA Objective 7.2) 

? Polymorphism means "many forms. 

? A reference variable is always of a single, unchangeable type, but it can refer to a 
subtype object. 

? A single object can be referred to by reference variables of many different typesas 
long as they are the same type or a supertype of the object. 

? The reference variables type (not the objects type) determines which methods can be 
called! 

? Polymorphic method invocations apply only to overridden instance methods. 

Overriding and Overloading (OCA Objectives 6.1 and 7.2) 

? Methods can be overridden or overloaded; constructors can be overloaded but not 


overridden. 

? With respect to the method it overrides, the overriding method 

? Must have the same argument list 

? Must have the same return type or a subclass (known as a covariant return) 

? Must not have a more restrictive access modifier 

? May have a less restrictive access modifier 

? Must not throw new or broader checked exceptions 

? May throw fewer or narrower checked exceptions, or any unchecked exception 

? final methods cannot be overridden. 

? Only inherited methods may be overridden, and remember that private methods are not 
inherited. 

? A subclass uses super. overriddenMethodName( ) to call the superclass version of an 
overridden method. 

? A subclass uses Mylnterface. super. overriddenMethodName() to call the super 
interface version on an overridden method. 

? Overloading means reusing a method name but with different arguments. 

? Overloaded methods 

? Must have different argument lists 

? May have different return types, if argument lists are also different 

? May have different access modifiers 

? May throw different exceptions 

? Methods from a supertype can be overloaded in a subtype. 

? Polymorphism applies to overriding, not to overloading. 

? Object type (not the reference variables type) determines which overridden method is 
used at runtime. 

? Reference type determines which overloaded method will be used at compile time. 

Reference Variable Casting (OCA Objective 7.3) 

? There are two types of reference variable casting: downcasting and upcasting. 

? Downcasting If you have a reference variable that refers to a subtype object, you 
can assign it to a reference variable of the subtype. You must make an explicit cast to do 
this, and the result is that you can access the subtypes members with this new reference 
variable. 

? Upcasting You can assign a reference variable to a supertype reference variable 
explicitly or implicitly. This is an inherently safe operation because the assignment 
restricts the access capabilities of the new variable. 

Implementing an Interface (OCA Objective 7.5) 


? When you implement an interface, you are fulfilling its contract. 

? You implement an interface by properly and concretely implementing all the abstract 
methods defined by the interface. 

? A single class can implement many interfaces. 

Return Types (OCA Objectives 7.2 and 7.5) 

? Overloaded methods can change return types; overridden methods cannot, except in the 
case of covariant returns. 

? Object reference return types can accept null as a return value. 

? An array is a legal return type, both to declare and return as a value. 

? For methods with primitive return types, any value that can be implicitly converted to 
the return type can be returned. 

? Nothing can be returned from a void, but you can return nothing. Youre allowed to 
simply say return in any method with a void return type to bust out of a method early. But 
you cant return nothing from a method with a non-void return type. 

? Methods with an object reference return type can return a subtype. 

? Methods with an interface return type can return any implementer. 

Constructors and Instantiation (OCA Objectives 6.3 and 7.4) 

? A constructor is always invoked when a new object is created. 

? Each superclass in an objects inheritance tree will have a constructor called. 

? Every class, even an abstract class, has at least one constructor. 

? Constructors must have the same name as the class. 

? Constructors dont have a return type. If you see code with a return type, its a method 
with the same name as the class; its not a constructor. 

? Typical constructor execution occurs as follows: 

? The constructor calls its superclass constructor, which calls its superclass 
constructor, and so on all the way up to the Ob j ect constructor. 

? The Ob j ect constructor executes and then returns to the calling constructor, which 
runs to completion and then returns to its calling constructor, and so on back down to the 
completion of the constructor of the actual instance being created. 

? Constructors can use any access modifier (even private!). 

? The compiler will create a default constructor if you dont create any constructors in 
your class. 

? The default constructor is a no-arg constructor with a no-arg call to super (). 

? The first statement of every constructor must be a call either to this() (an overloaded 
constructor) or to super (). 

? The compiler will add a call to super () unless you have already put in a call to this () or 


super (). 

? Instance members are accessible only after the super constructor runs. 

? Abstract classes have constructors that are called when a concrete subclass is 
instantiated. 

? Interfaces do not have constructors. 

? If your superclass does not have a no-arg constructor, you must create a constructor and 
insert a call to super () with arguments matching those of the superclass constructor. 

? Constructors are never inherited; thus they cannot be overridden. 

? A constructor can be directly invoked only by another constructor (using a call to 
super () or this()). 

? Regarding issues with calls to this(): 

? They may appear only as the first statement in a constructor. 

? The argument list determines which overloaded constructor is called. 

? Constructors can call constructors, and so on, but sooner or later one of them better 
call super () or the stack will explode. 

? Calls to this() and super () cannot be in the same constructor. You can have one or 
the other, but never both. 

Initialization Blocks (OCA Objective 1.2 and 6.3-ish) 

? Use static init blocksstatic { /* code here */ }for code you want to have 
run once, when the class is first loaded. Multiple blocks run from the top down. 

? Use normal init blocks{ /* code here }for code you want to have run for every 
new instance, right after all the super constructors have run. Again, multiple blocks run from 
the top of the class down. 

Statics (OCA Objective 6.2) 

? Use static methods to implement behaviors that are not affected by the state of any 
instances. 

? Use static variables to hold data that is class specific as opposed to instance specific 
there will be only one copy of a static variable. 

? All static members belong to the class, not to any instance. 

? A static method cant access an instance variable directly. 

? Use the dot operator to access static members, but remember that using a reference 
variable with the dot operator is really a syntax trick, and the compiler will substitute the 
class name for the reference variable; for instance: 

d.doStuff(); 

becomes 


Dog.doStuff(); 


? To invoke an interfaces static method use Mylnterface. doStuff () syntax. 

? static methods cant be overridden, but they can be redefined. 


SELF TEST 


1. Given: 

public abstract interface Frobnicate { public void twiddle(String s); } 
Which is a correct class? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. public abstract class Frob implements Frobnicate { 

public abstract void twiddle(String s) { } 

} 

B. public abstract class Frob implements Frobnicate { } 

C. public class Frob extends Frobnicate { 

public void twiddle(Integer i) { } 

} 

D. public class Frob implements Frobnicate { 

public void twiddle(Integer i) { } 

} 

E. public class Frob implements Frobnicate { 

public void twiddle(String i) { } 
public void twiddle(Integer s) { } 

} 

2. Given: 

class Top { 

public Top(String s) { System.out.print("B"); } 

} ' 

public class Bottom2 extends Top { 

public Bottom2(String s) { System.out.print("D"); } 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
new Bottom2 ("C") ; 

System.out.printIn(" "); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. BD 

B. DB 

C. BDC 

D. DBC 

E. Compilation fails 

3. Given: 


class Clidder { 

private final void flipperO { System.out.printIn("Clidder"); } 

} 

public class Clidlet extends Clidder { 

public final void flipperO { System.out.println("Clidlet"); } 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
new Clidlet().flipper(); 

} 

What is the result? 

A. Clidlet 

B. Clidder 

C. Clidder 
Clidlet 

D. Clidlet 
Clidder 

E. Compilation fails 

Special Note: The next question crudely simulates a style of question known as drag-and- 
drop. Up through the SC JP 6 exam, drag-and-drop questions were included on the exam As of 
spring 2014, Oracle DOES NOT include any drag-and-drop questions on its Java exams, but 
just in case Oracles policy changes, we left a few in the book. 

4. Using the fragments below, complete the following code so it compiles. Note that you 
may not have to fill in all of the slots. 

Code: 

class AgedP { 

public AgedP(int x) { 

} 

} 

public class Kinder extends AgedP { 
public Kinder(int x) { 

_ _ _ _ _ 0 ; 

} 

} 

Fragments: Use the following fragments zero or more times: 


AgedP 

super 

this 


( 

) 

{ 

} 

f 





5. Given: 





























class Bird { 

{ System.out.print("bl "); } 

public Bird() { System.out.print("b2 "); } 

} ' 

class Raptor extends Bird { 

static { System.out.print("rl "); } 

public RaptorO { System, out .print ("r2 M ); } 

{ System.out.print("r3 "); } 

static { System.out.print("r4 "); } 

} 

class Hawk extends Raptor { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.print("pre "); 
new Hawk(); 

System.out.printIn("hawk "); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. pre bl b2 r3 r2 hawk 

B. pre b2 bl r2 r3 hawk 

C. pre b2 bl r2 r3 hawk rl r4 

D. rl r4 pre bl b2 r3 r2 hawk 

E. rl r4 pre b2 bl r2 r3 hawk 

E pre rl r4 bl b2 r3 r2 hawk 

G. pre rl r4 b2 bl r2 r3 hawk 

H. The order of output cannot be predicted 

I. Compilation fails 

Note: Youll probably never see this many choices on the real exam! 

6. Given the following: 

1. class X { void dol() { } } 

2. class Y extends X { void do2() { } } 

3 . 

4. class Chrome { 

5. public static void main(String [] args) { 

6 . X xl = new X(); 

7. X x2 = new Y(); 

8. Y yl = new Y(); 

9. // insert code here 
10 . } } 

Which of the following, inserted at line 9, will compile? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. x2.do2(); 

B. (Y)x2.do2(); 

C. ((Y)x2).do2(); 

D. None of the above statements will compile 

7. Given: 


public class Locomotive { 

LocomotiveO { main ( "hi" ) ; } 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
System.out.print("2 "); 

} 

public static void main(String args) { 
System.out.print("3 " + args); 

} 

} 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. 2 will be included in the output 

B. 3 will be included in the output 

C. hi will be included in the output 

D. Compilation fails 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 
8. Given: 


3 . 

class Dog { 


4 . 

public void bark() { System.out.print("woof " 

); } 

5 . 

} ' 


6 . 

class Hound extends Dog { 


7 . 

public void sniff() { System.out.print("sniff 

-); } 

8 . 

public void bark() { System.out.print("howl " 

); } 

9 . 

} ' 


10 . 

public class DogShow { 


11. 

public static void main(String[] args) { new 

DogShow() 

12 . 

void go() { 


13 . 

new Hound().bark(); 


14 . 

((Dog) new Hound()).bark(); 


15 . 

((Dog) new Hound()).sniff(); 


16 . 

} 


17 . 

} 



What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. howl howl sniff 

B. howl woof sniff 

C. howl howl followed by an exception 

D. howl woof followed by an exception 

E. Compilation fails with an error at line 14 

F. Compilation fails with an error at line 15 
9. Given: 


3. public class Redwood extends Tree { 

4. public static void main(String[] args) { 

5. new Redwood().go(); 

6 . } 

7. void go() { 

8. go2(new Tree(), new Redwood()); 

9. go2((Redwood) new Tree(), new Redwood()); 

10. } 

11. void go2(Tree tl. Redwood rl) { 

12. Redwood r2 = (Redwood)tl; 

13. Tree t2 = (Tree)rl; 

14. } 

15. } 

16. class Tree { } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. An exception is thrown at runtime 

B. The code compiles and runs with no output 

C. Compilation fails with an error at line 8 

D. Compilation fails with an error at line 9 

E. Compilation fails with an error at line 12 
E Compilation fails with an error at line 13 

10. Given: 

3. public class Tenor extends Singer { 

4. public static String sing() { return "fa"; } 

5. public static void main(String[] args) { 

6. Tenor t = new Tenor(); 

7. Singer s = new Tenor(); 

8. System. out. println (t. sing () + " " + s.singO); 

9- } 

10. } 

11. class Singer { public static String sing() { return "la"; } } 

What is the result? 

A. fa fa 

B. fa la 

C. la la 

D. Compilation fails 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 


11. Given: 


II II . 


3. class Alpha { 

4. static String s = 

5. protected Alpha() { s += "alpha } 

6 . } 

7. class SubAlpha extends Alpha { 

8. private SubAlpha() { s += "sub } 

9- } 

10. public class SubSubAlpha extends Alpha { 

11. private SubSubAlpha() { s += "subsub "; 

12. public static void main(String [] args) { 

13. new SubSubAlpha(); 

14. System.out.println(s); 

15. } 

16. } 

What is the result? 

A. subsub 

B. sub subsub 

C. alpha subsub 

D. alpha sub subsub 

E. Compilation fails 

E An exception is thrown at runtime 
12. Given: 

3. class Alpha { 

4. static String s = " "; 

5. protected Alpha() { s += "alpha "; } 

6 . } 

7. class SubAlpha extends Alpha { 

8. private SubAlpha() { s += "sub "; } 

9- } 

10. public class SubSubAlpha extends Alpha { 

11. private SubSubAlpha() { s += "subsub 

12. public static void main(String[] args) { 

13. new SubSubAlpha(); 

14. System.out.println(s); 

15. } 

16. } 

What is the result? 

A. h hn x 

B. hn x h 

C. b h hn x 

D. b hn x h 

E. bn x h hn x 

F. b bn x h hn x 

G. bn x b h hn x 

H. Compilation fails 


13. Given: 


3. class Mammal { 

4. String name = "furry "; 

5. String makeNoiseO { return "generic noise"; } 

6 . } 

7. class Zebra extends Mammal { 

8. String name = "stripes "; 

9. String makeNoiseO { return "bray"; } 

10. } 

11. public class ZooKeeper { 

12. public static void main(String[] args) { new ZooKeeper().go(); } 

13. void go() { 

14. Mammal m = new Zebra (); 

15. System.out.printIn(m.name + m.makeNoise()); 

16. } 

17. } 

What is the result? 

A. furry bray 

B. stripes bray 

C. furry generic noise 

D. stripes generic noise 

E. Compilation fails 

E An exception is thrown at runtime 
14. Given: 

1. interface FrogBoilable { 

2. static int getCtoF(int cTemp) { 

3. return (cTemp * 9 / 5) + 32; 

4- } 

5. default String hop() { return "hopping "; } 

6. } 

7. public class DontBoilFrogs implements FrogBoilable { 

8. public static void main(String[] args) { 

9. new DontBoilFrogs().go(); 

10. } 

11. void go() { 

12 . System.out.print(hop()) ; 

13. System.out.println(getCtoF(100)); 

14. System.out.println(FrogBoilable.getCtoF(100)); 

15. DontBoilFrogs dbf = new DontBoilFrogs(); 

16. System.out.println(dbf.getCtoF(100)); 

17. } 

18. } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. hopping 212 

B. Compilation fails due to an error on line 2 

C. Compilation fails due to an error on line 5 

D. Compilation fails due to an error on line 12 


E. Compilation fails due to an error on line 13 
E Compilation fails due to an error on line 14 
G. Compilation fails due to an error on line 16 

15. Given: 

interface II { 

default int doStuffO { return 1; } 

} 

interface 12 { 

default int doStuffO { return 2; } 

} 

public class MultiInt implements II, 12 { 
public static void main(String[] args) { 
new MultiInt().go(); 

} 

void go() { 

System.out.println(doStuff()); 

} 

int doStuffO { 
return 3; 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. l 

B. 2 

C. 3 

D. The output is unpredictable 

E. Compilation fails 

E An exception is thrown at runtime 

16. Given: 

interface Mylnterface { 
default int doStuffO { 
return 42; 

} 

} 

public class IfaceTest implements Mylnterface { 
public static void main(String[] args) { 
new IfaceTest().go(); 

} 

void go() { 

// INSERT CODE HERE 

} 

public int doStuffO { 
return 43; 

} 

} 

Which line(s) of code, inserted independently at // INSERT CODE HERE, will allow the 
code to compile? (Choose all that apply.) 


A. System.out.println("class: 

B. System.out.println("iface: 

C. System.out.println("iface: 

D. System.out.println("iface: 

E. System.out.println("iface: 


+ doStuff()); 

+ super.doStuff()); 

+ Mylnterface.super.doStuff()); 
+ Mylnterface.doStuff()); 

+ super.Mylnterface.doStuff()); 


E None of the lines, A-E will allow the code to compile 


SELF TEST ANSWERS 

1. 0 B and E are correct. B is correct because an abstract class need not implement any 
or all of an interfaces methods. E is correct because the class implements the interface 
method and additionally overloads the twiddle!) method. 

3 A, C, andD are incorrect. A is incorrect because abstract methods have no body. C is 
incorrect because classes implement interfaces; they dont extend them. D is incorrect 
because overloading a method is not implementing it. (OCA Objectives 7.1 and 7.5) 

2. 0 E is correct. The implied super () call in Bottom2s constructor cannot be satisfied 
because there is no no-arg constructor in Top. A default, no-arg constructor is generated by 
the compiler only if the class has no constructor defined explicitly. 

S3 A, B, C, and D are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 6.3) 

3. 0 A is correct. Although a final method cannot be overridden, in this case, the method 
is private and, therefore, hidden. The effect is that a new, accessible, method flipper is 
created. Therefore, no polymorphism occurs in this example, the method invoked is simply 
that of the child class, and no error occurs. 

3 B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the preceding. (OCA Objective 7.2) 

Special Note: This next question crudely simulates a style of question known as drag-and- 
drop. Up through the SC JP 6 exam, drag-and-drop questions were included on the exam. As 
of spring 2014, Oracle DOES NOT include any drag-and-drop questions on its Java exams, 
but just in case Oracles policy changes, we left a few in the book. 

4. Here is the answer: 

class AgedP { 

AgedP() {} 

public AgedP(int x) { 

} 

} 

public class Kinder extends AgedP { 
public Kinder(int x) { 
super(); 

} 

} 

As there is no droppable tile for the variable x and the parentheses (in the Kinder 
constructor) are already in place and empty, there is no way to construct a call to the 
superclass constructor that takes an argument. Therefore, the only remaining possibility is to 


create a call to the no-arg superclass constructor. This is done as super ();. The line cannot 
be left blank, as the parentheses are already in place. Further, since the superclass 
constructor called is the no-arg version, this constructor must be created. It will not be 
created by the compiler because another constructor is already present. (OCA Objectives 6.3 
and 7.4) Note: As you can see, many questions test for OCA Objective 7.1, were going to 
stop mentioning objective 7.1. 

5. 0 D is correct. Static init blocks are executed at class loading time; instance init 
blocks run right after the call to super () in a constructor. When multiple init blocks of a 
single type occur in a class, they run in order, from the top down. 

S A, B, C, E, F, G, H, and I are incorrect based on the above. Note: Youll probably never see 
this many choices on the real exam! (OCA Objective 6.3) 

6. 0 C is correct. Before you can invoke Ys do2 method, you have to cast x2 to be of type 
Y. 

SI A, B, and D are incorrect based on the preceding. B looks like a proper cast, but without the 
second set of parentheses, the compiler thinks its an incomplete statement. (OCA Objective 
7.3) 

7. 0 A is correct. Its legal to overload main( ). Since no instances of Locomotive are 
created, the constructor does not run and the overloaded version of main () does not run. 

SJ B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the preceding. (OCA Objectives 1.3 and 6.3) 

8. 0 F is correct. Class Dog doesnt have a sniff method. 

S A, B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objectives 7.2 and 
7.3) 

9. 0 A is correct. AelassCastException will be thrown when the code attempts to 
downcast a Tree to a Redwood. 

3 B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objective 7.3) 

10. 0 B is correct. The code is correct, but polymorphism doesnt apply to static methods. 
S3 A, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objectives 6.2 and 7.2) 

11. 0 C is correct. Watch out, because SubSubAlpha extends Alpha! Because the code 
doesnt attempt to make a SubAlpha, the private constructor in SubAlpha is okay. 

3 A, B, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objectives 6.3 and 
7.2) 

12. 0 C is correct. Remember that constructors call their superclass constructors, which 
execute first, and that constructors can be overloaded. 

S3 A, B, D, E, F, G, and H are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objectives 6.3 
and 7.4) 

13. 0 A is correct. Polymorphism is only for instance methods, not instance variables. 

IS B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCA Objective 6.3) 

14. 0 E and G are correct. Neither of these lines of code uses the correct syntax to invoke 
an interfaces static method. 

S A, B, C, D, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCP Objectives 6.2 and 
7.5) 

15. 0 E is correct. This is kind of a trick question; the implementing method must be 


marked public. If it was, all the other code is legal, and the output would be 3. If you 
understood all the multiple inheritance rules and just missed the access modifier, give yourself 
half credit. 

S3 A, B, C, D, and F are incorrect based on the above information. (OCP Objective 7.5) 

16. 0 A and C are correct. A uses correct syntax to invoke the classs method, and C uses 
the correct syntax to invoke the interfaces overloaded default method. 

S3 B, D, E, and F are incorrect. (OCP Objective 7.5) 




3 

Assignments 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES 


 Use Class Members 

 Understand Primitive Casting 

 Understand Variable Scope 

 Differentiate Between Primitive Variables and Reference Variables 

 Determine the Effects of Passing Variables into Methods 

 Understand Object Lifecycle and Garbage Collection 

/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 


Stack and HeapQuick Review 

For most people, understanding the basics of the stack and the heap makes it far easier to understand 
topics like argument passing, polymorphism, threads, exceptions, and garbage collection. In this section, 
well stick to an overview, but well expand these topics several more times throughout the book. 

For the most part, the various pieces (methods, variables, and objects) of Java programs live in one of 
two places in memory: the stack or the heap. For now, were concerned about only three types of things 
instance variables, local variables, and objects: 

 Instance variables and objects live on the heap. 
m Local variables live on the stack. 

Lets take a look at a Java program and how its various pieces are created and map into the stack and 
the heap: 




1. 

o 

class Collar { } 



z . 

3 . 

class Dog { 



4 . 

Collar c; 

// 

instance variable 

5 . 

r 

String name; 

// 

instance variable 

D . 

7 . 

8 . 

9 . 

public static void main(String 

[] args) { 

Dog d; 

// 

local variable: d 

10 . 

d = new Dog(); 



11 . 

d.go(d); 



12 . 

} 



13 . 

void go(Dog dog) { 

// 

local variable: dog 

14 . 

c = new Collar(); 



15 . 

dog.setName("Aiko"); 



16 . 

} 



17 . 

void setName(String dogName) { 

// 

local var: dogName 

18 . 

name = dogName; 



19 . 

// do more stuff 



20 . 

} 



21. 

} 




Figure 3-1 shows the state of the stack and the heap once the program reaches line 19. Following are 
some key points: 



 Line 7main() is placed on the stack. 

 Line 9Reference variable d is created on the stack, but theres no Dog object yet. 

 Line 10Anew Dog object is created on the heap and is assigned to the d reference variable. 

 Line 11A copy of the reference variable d is passed to the go () method. 

 Line 13The go() method is placed on the stack, with the dog parameter as a local variable. 

Line 14Anew Collar object is created on the heap and assigned to Dogs instance 
variable. 

 Line 17setName() is added to the stack, with the dogName parameter as its local variable. 

 Line 18The name instance variable now also refers to the string object. 

 Notice that two different local variables refer to the same Dog object. 

 Notice that one local variable and one instance variable both refer to the same string Aiko. 











 After Line 19 completes, setName( ) completes and is removed from the stack. At this point 
the local variable dogName disappears, too, although the string object it referred to is still on the 
heap. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Literals, Assignments, and Variables 
(OCA Objectives 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3) 

2.1 Declare and initialize variables (including casting of primitive data types). 

2.2 Differentiate between object reference variables and primitive variables. 

2.3 Know how to read or write to object fields. 


Literal Values for All Primitive Types 

A primitive literal is merely a source code representation of the primitive data typesin other words, an 
integer, floating-point number, boolean, or character that you type in while writing code. The following 
are examples of primitive literals: 


1 b' 

// 

char literal 

42 

// 

int literal 

false 

// 

boolean literal 

2546789.343 

// 

double literal 


Integer Literals 

There are four ways to represent integer numbers in the Java language: decimal (base 10), octal (base 8), 
hexadecimal (base 16), and, as of Java 7, binary (base 2). Most exam questions with integer literals use 
decimal representations, but the few that use octal, hexadecimal, or binary are worth studying for. Even 
though the odds that youll ever actually use octal in the real world are astronomically tiny, they were 
included in the exam just for fun. Before we look at the four ways to represent integer numbers, lets first 
discuss a new feature added to Java 7: literals with underscores. 

Numeric Literals with Underscores As of Java 7, numeric literals can be declared using 
underscore characters (_), ostensibly to improve readability. Lets compare a pre-Java 7 declaration to an 
easier-to-read Java 7 declaration: 

int pre7 = 1000000; // pre Java 7 - we hope it's a million 

int with7 = 1_000_000; // much clearer! 

The main rule you have to keep track of is that you CANNOT use the underscore literal at the 
beginning or end of the literal. The potential gotcha here is that youre free to use the underscore in 
weird places: 

int il = _1_000_000; // illegal, can't begin with an 

int i2 = 10_0000_0; // legal, but confusing 



As a final note, remember that you can use the underscore character for any of the numeric types 
(including doubles and floats), but for doubles and floats, you CANNOT add an underscore character 
direcdy next to the decimal point, or next to the X or B in hex or binary numbers (which are coming up 
soon). 

Decimal Literals Decimal integers need no explanation; youve been using them since grade one or 
earlier. Chances are you dont keep your checkbook in hex. (If you do, theres a Geeks Anonymous [GA] 
group ready to help.) In the Java language, they are represented as is, with no prefix of any kind, as 
follows: 

int length = 343; 

Binary Literals Also new to Java 7 is the addition of binary literals. Binary literals can use only the 
digits 0 and 1. Binary literals must start with either 0B or 0b, as shown: 

int bl = 0B101010; // set bl to binary 101010 (decimal 42) 

int b2 = ObOOOll; // set b2 to binary 11 (decimal 3) 

Octal Literals Octal integers use only the digits 0 to 7. In Java, you represent an integer in octal form 
by placing a zero in front of the number, as follows: 

class Octal { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int six = 06; // Equal to decimal 6 

int seven =07; // Equal to decimal 7 

int eight = 010; // Equal to decimal 8 

int nine = Oil; // Equal to decimal 9 

System.out.println("Octal 010 = " + eight); 

} 

} 

You can have up to 21 digits in an octal number, not including the leading 0. If we run the preceding 
program, it displays the following: 

Octal 010 = 8 

Hexadecimal Literals Hexadecimal (hex for short) numbers are constructed using 16 distinct 
symbols. Because we never invented single-digit symbols for the numbers 10 through 15, we use 
alphabetic characters to represent these digits. Counting from 0 through 15 in hex looks like this: 

0123456789abcdef 

Java will accept uppercase or lowercase letters for the extra digits (one of the few places Java is not 
case sensitive!). You are allowed up to 16 digits in a hexadecimal number, not including the prefix 0x (or 
ex) or the optional suffix extension L, which will be explained a bit later in the chapter. All of the 
following hexadecimal assignments are legal: 


class HexTest { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
int x = 0X0001; 
int y = 0x7fffffff; 
int z = OxDeadCafe; 

System.out.printIn("x = " + x + " y = " + y + " z = " + z); 

} 

} 

Running HexTest produces the following output: 
x  1 y  2147483647 z = -559035650 

Dont be misled by changes in case for a hexadecimal digit or the x preceding it. 0XCAFE and 0xcaf e 
are both legal and have the same value. 

All four integer literals (binary, octal, decimal, and hexadecimal) are defined as int by default, but 
they may also be specified as long by placing a suffix of L or 1 after the number: 

long jo = 110599L; 

long so = 0XFFFF1; // Note the lowercase '1' 

Floating-point Literals 

Floating-point numbers are defined as a number, a decimal symbol, and more numbers representing the 
fraction. In the following example, the number 11301874.9881024 is the literal value: 

double d = 11301874.9881024; 

Floating-point literals are defined as double (64 bits) by default, so if you want to assign a floating 
point literal to a variable of type float (32 bits), you must attach the suffix F or f to the number. If you 
dont do this, the compiler will complain about a possible loss of precision, because youre trying to fit 
number into a (potentially) less precise container. The F suffix gives you a way to tell the compiler, 
Hey, I know what Im doing, and Ill take the risk, thank you very much. 

float f = 23.467890; // Compiler error, possible loss 

// of precision 

float g = 49837849.029847F; // OK; has the suffix "F" 

You may also optionally attach a D or d to double literals, but it is not necessary because this is the 
default behavior. 


double d = 110599.995011D; // Optional, not required 

double g = 987.897; //No 'D' suffix, but OK because the 

// literal is a double by default 


Look for numeric literals that include a comma; heres an example: 


int x = 25,343; 


// Won't compile because of the comma 


Boolean Literals 

Boolean literals are the source code representation for boolean values. A boolean value can be defined 
only as true or false. Although in C (and some other languages), it is common to use numbers to 
represent true or false, this will not work in Java. Again, repeat after me: Java is not C. 


boolean t = true; // Legal 
boolean f = 0; // Compiler error! 

Be on the lookout for questions that use numbers where booleans are required. You might see an if 
test that uses a number, as in the following: 

int x = 1; if (x) { } // Compiler error! 

Character Literals 

A char literal is represented by a single character in single quotes: 

char a = 'a'; 
char b = ; 

You can also type in the Unicode value of the character, using the Unicode notation of prefixing the 
value with \u, as follows: 

char letterN = '\uGG4E'; // The letter 'l\T 

Remember, characters are just 16-bit unsigned integers under the hood. That means you can assign a 
number literal, assuming it will fit into the unsigned 16-bit range (0 to 65535). For example, the following 
are all legal: 


char 

a = 0x892; 

// 

hexadecimal 

literal 

char 

b = 982; 

// 

int literal 


char 

c = (char)70000; 

// 

The cast is 

required; 



// 

out of char 

range 

char 

d = (char) -98; 

// 

Ridiculous, 

but legal 


And the following are not legal and produce compiler errors: 

char e = -29; // Possible loss of precision; needs a cast 

char f = 70000; // Possible loss of precision; needs a cast 

You can also use an escape code (the backslash) if you want to represent a character that cant be 
typed in as a literal, including the characters for linefeed, newline, horizontal tab, backspace, and quotes: 

char c = '\"' ; //A double quote 

char d = 1 \n'; //A newline 

char tab = '\t' ; //A tab 

Literal Values for Strings 

A string literal is a source code representation of a value ofastring object. The following is an 
example of two ways to represent a string literal: 

String s = "Bill Joy"; 

System.out.println("Bill" + " Joy"); 

Although strings are not primitives, theyre included in this section because they can be represented as 
literalsin other words, they can be typed directly into code. The only other nonprimitive type that has a 
literal representation is an array, which well look at later in the chapter. 


Thread t = ??? // what literal value could possibly go here? 


Assignment Operators 

Assigning a value to a variable seems straightforward enough; you simply assign the stuff on the right side 
of the = to the variable on the left. Well, sure, but dont expect to be tested on something like this: 

x = 6; 

No, you wont be tested on the no-brainer (technical term) assignments. You will, however, be tested 
on the trickier assignments involving complex expressions and casting. Well look at both primitive and 
reference variable assignments. But before we begin, lets back up and peek inside a variable. What is a 
variable? How are the variable and its value related? 

Variables are just bit holders with a designated type. You can have an int holder, a double holder, a 
Button holder, and even a string [ ] holder. Within that holder is a bunch of bits representing the value. 
For primitives, the bits represent a numeric value (although we dont know what that bit pattern looks like 
for boolean, luckily, we dont care). A by te with a value of 6, for example, means that the bit pattern in 
the variable (the byte holder) is 00000110, representing the 8 bits. 

So the value of a primitive variable is clear, but whats inside an object holder? If you say, 

Button b = new Button(); 

whats inside the Button holder b? Is it the Button object? No! A variable referring to an object is just 
thata reference variable. A reference variable bit holder contains bits representing a way to get to the 
object. We dont know what the format is. The way in which object references are stored is virtual- 
machine specific (its a pointer to something, we just dont know what that something really is). All we 
can say for sure is that the variables value is not the object, but rather a value representing a specific 
object on the heap. Or null. If the reference variable has not been assigned a value or has been explicidy 
assigned a value of null, the variable holds bits representingyou guessed it null. You can read 

Button b = null; 

as The Button variable b is not referring to any object. 

So now that we know a variable is just a little box o bits, we can get on with the work of changing 
those bits. Well look first at assigning values to primitives and then finish with assignments to reference 
variables. 


Primitive Assignments 

The equal (=) sign is used for assigning a value to a variable, and its cleverly named the assignment 
operator. There are actually 12 assignment operators, but only the 5 most commonly used assignment 
operators are on the exam, and they are covered in Chapter 4. 

You can assign a primitive variable using a literal or the result of an expression. 

Take a look at the following: 


int 

X=7; 

// 

int 

y=X+2; 

// 



// 

int 

z = x * y; 

// 


literal assignment 
assignment with an expression 
(including a literal) 
assignment with an expression 


The most important point to remember is that a literal integer (such as 7) is always implicitly an int. 
Thinking back to Chapter 1, youll recall that an int is a 32-bit value. No big deal if youre assigning a 
value to an int or a long variable, but what if youre assigning to a byte variable? After all, a byte 
sized holder cant hold as many bits as an int-sized holder. Heres where it gets weird. The following is 
legal, 


byte b = 27; 

but only because the compiler automatically narrows the literal value to a byte. In other words, the 
compiler puts in the cast. The preceding code is identical to the following: 

byte b = (byte) 27; // Explicitly cast the int literal to a byte 

It looks as though the compiler gives you a break and lets you take a shortcut with assignments to 
integer variables smaller than an int. (Everything were saying about byte applies equally to char and 
short, both of which are smaller than an int.) Were not actually at the weird part yet, by the way. 

We know that a literal integer is always an int, but more importandy, the result of an expression 
involving anything int-sized or smaller is always an int. In other words, add two bytes together and 
youll get an int even if those two bytes are tiny. Multiply an int and a short and youll get an int. 
Divide a short by a byte and youll get.. .an int. Okay, now were at the weird part. Check this out: 

byte a = 3; //No problem, 3 fits in a byte 

byte b = 8; // No problem, 8 fits in a byte 

byte c = a + b; // Should be no problem, sum of the two bytes 

// fits in a byte 

The last line wont compile! Youll get an error something like what your grandfather used to get: 

TestBytes.java:5: possible loss of precision 
found : int 
required: byte 

byte c = a + b; 

A 

We tried to assign the sum of two bytes to a byte variable, the result of which (11) was definitely 
small enough to fit into a byte, but the compiler didnt care. It knew the rule about int-or-smaller 
expressions always resulting in an int. It would have compiled if wed done the explicit cast: 

byte c = (byte) (a + b); 





We were struggling to find a good way to teach this topic, and our friend, co-JavaRanch* 
moderator and repeat technical reviewer Marc Peabody, came up with the following. We think 
he did a great job: IPs perfectly legal to declare multiple variables of the same type with a 
single line by placing a comma between each variable: 


int a, b, c; 






You also have the option to initialize any number of those variables right in place: 

int j, k=l, 1, m=3; 

And these variables are each evaluated in the order that you read them, left to right. Its just as 
if you were to declare each one on a separate line: 

int j; 
int k=l; 
int 1; 
int m=3; 

But the order is important. This is legal: 

int j, k=l, 1 # m=k+3; // legal: k is initialized before m uses it 

But these are not: 

int j, k=m+3, 1, m=l; // illegal: m is not declared and initialized 
// before k uses it 

int x, y=x+l, z; // illegal: x is not initialized before y uses it 

*1 know, I know, but itll always be JavaRanch in our hearts. 


Primitive Casting 

Casting lets you convert primitive values from one type to another. We mentioned primitive casting in the 
previous section, but now were going to take a deeper look. (Object casting was covered in Chapter 2.) 

Casts can be implicit or explicit. An implicit cast means you dont have to write code for the cast; the 
conversion happens automatically. Typically, an implicit cast happens when youre doing a widening 
conversionin other words, putting a smaller thing (say, a byte) into a bigger container (such as an int). 
Remember those possible loss of precision compiler errors we saw in the assignments section? 
Those happened when we tried to put a larger thing (say, a long) into a smaller container (such as a 
short). The large-value-into-small-container conversion is referred to as narrowing and requires an 
explicit cast, where you tell the compiler that youre aware of the danger and accept full responsibility. 
First well look at an implicit cast: 

int a = 100; 

long b = a; // Implicit cast, an int value always fits in a long 

An explicit cast looks like this: 
float a = 100.001f; 

int b = (int)a; // explicit cast, the int might lose some of float's info! 

Integer values maybe assigned to a double variable without explicit casting, because any integer 
value can fit in a 64-bit double. The following line demonstrates this: 

double d = 100L; // Implicit cast 

In the preceding statement, a double is initialized with a long value (as denoted by the L after the 





numeric value). No cast is needed in this case because a double can hold every piece of information that 
a long can store. If, however, we want to assign a double value to an integer type, were attempting a 
narrowing conversion and the compiler knows it: 

class Casting { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int x = 3957.229; // illegal 

} 

} 

If we try to compile the preceding code, we get an error something like this: 

% javac Casting.java 

Casting.java:3: Incompatible type for declaration. Explicit cast 
needed to convert double to int. 

int x = 3957.229; // illegal 
1 error 

In the preceding code, a floating-point value is being assigned to an integer variable. Because an 
integer is not capable of storing decimal places, an error occurs. To make this work, well cast the 
floating-point number to an int: 

class Casting { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int x = (int)3957.229; // legal cast 
System.out.printIn("int x = " + x); 

} 

} 

When you cast a floating-point number to an integer type, the value loses all the digits after the 
decimal. The preceding code will produce the following output: 

int x = 3957 

We can also cast a larger number type, such as a long, into a smaller number type, such as a byte. 
Look at the following: 

class Casting { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
long 1 = 56L; 
byte b = (byte)l; 

System.out.println("The byte is " + b); 

} 

} 

The preceding code will compile and run fine. But what happens if the long value is larger than 127 
(the largest number a byte can store)? Lets modify the code: 


class Casting { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
long 1 = 13OL; 
byte b = (byte)l; 

System.out.printIn("The byte is " + b); 

} 

} 

The code compiles fine, and when we run it we get the following: 

%java Casting 
The byte is -126 

We dont get a runtime error, even when the value being narrowed is too large for the type. The bits to 
the left of the lower 8 just.. .go away. If the leftmost bit (the sign bit) in the byte (or any integer primitive) 
now happens to be a 1, the primitive will have a negative value. 


EXERCISE 3-1 


Casting Primitives 

Create a float number type of any value, and assign it to a short using casting. 

1. Declare a float variable: float f = 234.56F; 

2. Assign the float to a short: short s = (short)f; 

i-1 

Assigning Floating-point Numbers 

Floating-point numbers have a slighdy different assignment behavior than integer types. First, you must 
know that every floating-point literal is implicidy a double (64 bits), not a float. So the literal 32.3, for 
example, is considered a double. If you try to assign a double to a float, the compiler knows you dont 
have enough room in a 32-bit float container to hold the precision of a 64-bit double, and it lets you 
know. The following code looks good, but it wont compile: 

float f = 32.3; 

You can see that 32.3 should fit just fine into a float-sized variable, but the compiler wont allow it. In 
order to assign a floating-point literal to a float variable, you must either cast the value or append an f 
to the end of the literal. The following assignments will compile: 

float f = (float) 32.3; 

float g = 32.3f; 

float h = 32.3F; 

Assigning a Literal That Is Too Large for the Variable 

Well also get a compiler error if we try to assign a literal value that the compiler knows is too big to fit 
into the variable. 


byte a = 128; // byte can only hold up to 127 





The preceding code gives us an error something like this: 


TestBytes.java:5: possible loss of precision 
found : int 
required: byte 
byte a = 128; 


We can fix it with a cast: 
byte a = (byte) 128; 

But then whats the result? When you narrow a primitive, Java simply truncates the higher-order bits 
that wont fit. In other words, it loses all the bits to the left of the bits youre narrowing to. 

Lets take a look at what happens in the preceding code. There, 128 is the bit pattern 10000000. It 
takes a full 8 bits to represent 128. But because the literal 128 is an int, we actually get 32 bits, with the 
128 living in the rightmost (lower order) 8 bits. So a literal 128 is actually 

00000000000000000000000010000000 

Take our word for it; there are 32 bits there. 

To narrow the 32 bits representing 128, Java simply lops off the leftmost (higher order) 24 bits. What 
remains is just the 10000000. But remember that a byte is signed, with the leftmost bit representing the 
sign (and not part of the value of the variable). So we end up with a negative number (the 1 that used to 
represent 128 now represents the negative sign bit). Remember, to find out the value of a negative number 
using 2s complement notation, you flip all of the bits and then add 1. Flipping the 8 bits gives us 
01111111, and adding 1 to that gives us 10000000, or back to 128! And when we apply the sign bit, we 
end up with -128. 

You must use an explicit cast to assign 128 to a byte, and the assignment leaves you with the value - 
128. A cast is nothing more than your way of saying to the compiler, Trust me. Im a professional. I take 
full responsibility for anything weird that happens when those top bits are chopped off. 

That brings us to the compound assignment operators. This will compile: 

byte b = 3; 

b += 7; // No problem - adds 7 to b (result is 10) 

and it is equivalent to this: 

byte b = 3; 

b = (byte) (b + 7); // Won't compile without the 

// cast, since b + 7 results in an int 

The compound assignment operator += lets you add to the value of b, without putting in an explicit cast. 
In fact, +=, -=, *=, and /- will all put in an implicit cast. 

Assigning One Primitive Variable to Another Primitive Variable 

When you assign one primitive variable to another, the contents of the right-hand variable are copied. For 
example: 

int a = 6; 
int b = a; 

This code can be read as, Assign the bit pattern for the number 6 to the int variable a. Then copy the bit 


pattern in a, and place the copy into variable b. 

So both variables now hold a bit pattern for 6, but the two variables have no other relationship. We 
used the variable a only to copy its contents. At this point, a and b have identical contents (in other 
words, identical values), but if we change the contents of either a or b, the other variable wont be 
affected. 

Take a look at the following example: 

class ValueTest { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
int a = 10; // Assign a value to a 

System.out.println("a = " + a); 
int b = a; 
b = 30; 

System.out.println("a = " + a + " after change to b"); 

} 

} 

The output from this program is 

%java ValueTest 
a = 10 

a = 10 after change to b 

Notice the value of a stayed at 10. The key point to remember is that even after you assign a to b, a and 
b are not referring to the same place in memory. The a and b variables do not share a single value; they 
have identical copies. 

Reference Variable Assignments 

You can assign a newly created object to an object reference variable as follows: 

Button b = new Button(); 

The preceding line does three key things: 

I Makes a reference variable named b, of type Button 
 Creates a new Button object on the heap 

n Assigns the newly created Button object to the reference variable b 

You can also assign null to an object reference variable, which simply means the variable is not 
referring to any object: 

Button c = null; 

The preceding line creates space for the Button reference variable (the bit holder for a reference value), 
but it doesnt create an actual Button object. 

As we discussed in the last chapter, you can also use a reference variable to refer to any object that is 
a subclass of the declared reference variable type, as follows: 


public class Foo { 

public void doFooStuff() { } 

} 

public class Bar extends Foo { 
public void doBarStuffO { } 

} 

class Test { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Foo reallyABar = new Bar(); // Legal because Bar is a 

// subclass of Foo 

Bar reallyAFoo = new Foo(); // Illegal! Foo is not a 

// subclass of Bar 

} 

} 

The rule is that you can assign a subclass of the declared type but not a superclass of the declared type. 
Remember, a Bar object is guaranteed to be able to do anything a Foo can do, so anyone with a Foo 
reference can invoke Foo methods even though the object is actually a Bar. 

In the preceding code, we see that Foo has a method doFooStuf f () that someone with a Foo reference 
might try to invoke. If the object referenced by the Foo variable is really a Foo, no problem But its also 
no problem if the object is a Bar because Bar inherited the doFooStuf f () method. You cant make it 
work in reverse, however. If somebody has a Bar reference, theyre going to invoke doBarStuff (), but if 
the object is a Foo, it wont know how to respond. 



atch 


The OCA 8 exam covers wrapper classes. We could have discussed wrapper classes in this 
chapter, but we felt it made more sense to discuss them in the context ofArrayLists (which we 
will cover in Chapter 6). So until you get to Chapter 6, all youll need to know about wrappers 
follows: 

A wrapper object is an object that holds the value of a primitive. Every kind of primitive has an 
associated wrapper class: Boolean, Byte, Character, Double, Float, Integer, Long, 
and Short. The following code creates two wrapper objects and then prints their values: 

Long x = new Long(42); // create an instance of Long with a value of 42 

Short s = new Short( n 57"); // create an instance of Short with a value of 57 

System.out.println(x + " " + s); 

produces the following output: 

42 57 

Well be diving much more deeply into wrappers in Chapter 5. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 





Scope (OCA Objective 1.1) 

1.1 Determine the scope of variables. 


Variable Scope 

Once youve declared and initialized a variable, a natural question is, How long will this variable be 
around? This is a question regarding the scope of variables. And not only is scope an important thing to 
understand in general, it also plays a big part in the exam. Lets start by looking at a class file: 


class Layout { 

static int s = 343 
int x; 

{ x = 7; int x2 = 
Layout() { x += 8; 

void doStuffO { 
int y = 0; 
for(int z = 0; z 
y += z + x; 


// 

// 

// 

; } // 
int x3 = 6;} // 

// 

// 

< 4; Z++) { // 


class 

static variable 
instance variable 
initialization block 
constructor 

method 

local variable 
'for' code block 


} 


} 


} 


As with variables in all Java programs, the variables in this program (s, x, x2, x3, y, and z) all have a 
scope: 


 s is a static variable. 

 x is an instance variable. 

 y is a local variable (sometimes called a method local variable), 
z is a block variable. 

 x2 is an init block variable, a flavor of local variable. 

 x3 is a constructor variable, a flavor of local variable. 

For the purposes of discussing the scope of variables, we can say that there are four basic scopes: 

1. Static variables have the longest scope; they are created when the class is loaded, and they 
survive as long as the class stays loaded in the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). 

2. Instance variables are the next most long-lived; they are created when a new instance is 
created, and they live until the instance is removed. 

3. Local variables are next; they live as long as their method remains on the stack. As well soon 
see, however, local variables can be alive and still be out of scope. 

4. Block variables live only as long as the code block is executing. 

Scoping errors come in many sizes and shapes. One common mistake happens when a variable is 
shadowed and two scopes overlap. Well take a detailed look at shadowing in a few pages. The most 


common reason for scoping errors is an attempt to access a variable that is not in scope. Lets look at 
three common examples of this type of error: 

 Attempting to access an instance variable from a static context (typically from main ()): 

class ScopeErrors { 
int x = 5; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

x++; // won't compile, x is an 'instance' variable 

} 

} 

 Attempting to access a local variable of the method that invoked you. When a method, say 
go (), invokes another method, say go2 () , go2 () wont have access to go ()s local variables. 
While go2 () is executing, go ()s local variables are still alive, but they are out of scope. When 
go2( ) completes, it is removed from the stack, and go( ) resumes execution. At this point, all of 
go ()s previously declared variables are back in scope. For example: 

class ScopeErrors { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

ScopeErrors s = new ScopeErrors(); 
s.go(); 

} 

void go() { 

int y = 5; 
go2 () ; 

y++; // once go2() completes, y is back in scope 

} 

void go2() { 

y++; // won't compile, y is local to go() 

} 

} 

 Attempting to use a block variable after the code block has completed. Its very common to 
declare and use a variable within a code block, but be careful not to try to use the variable once the 
block has completed: 

void go3() { 

for(int z = 0; z < 5; z++) { 

boolean test = false; 
if (z == 3) { 

test = true; 
break; 


} 

} 

System.out.print(test); 


// 'test' is an ex-variable, 
// it has ceased to be... 


In the last two examples, the compiler will say something like this: 
cannot find symbol 


This is the compilers way of saying, That variable you just tried to use? Well, it might have been valid 
in the distant past (like one line of code ago), but this is Internet time, baby, I have no memory of such a 
variable. 



atch 


Pay extra attention to code-block scoping errors. You might see them in switches, try-catches, 
for , do, and while loops, which well cover in later chapters. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Variable Initialization 

(OCA Objectives 2.1,4.1, and 4.2) 

2.1 Declare and initialize variables (including casting of primitive datatypes). 

4.1 Declare, instantiate, initialize and use a one-dimensional array 

4.2 Declare, instantiate, initialize and use multi-dimensional array (sic) 


Using a Variable or Array Element 
That Is Uninitialized and Unassigned 

Java gives us the option of initializing a declared variable or leaving it uninitialized. When we attempt to 
use the uninitialized variable, we can get different behavior depending on what type of variable or array 
we are dealing with (primitives or objects). The behavior also depends on the level (scope) at which we 
are declaring our variable. An instance variable is declared within the class but outside any method or 
constructor, whereas a local variable is declared within a method (or in the argument list of the method). 

Local variables are sometimes called stack, temporary, automatic, or method variables, but the rules 
for these variables are the same regardless of what you call them Although you can leave a local variable 
uninitialized, the compiler complains if you try to use a local variable before initializing it with a value, 
as we shall see. 

Primitive and Object Type Instance Variables 

Instance variables (also called member variables) are variables defined at the class level. That means the 
variable declaration is not made within a method, constructor, or any other initializer block. Instance 
variables are initialized to a default value each time a new instance is created, although they may be given 
an explicit value after the objects superconstructors have completed. Table 3-1 lists the default values 
for primitive and object types. 


TABLE 3-1 


Default Values for Primitives and Reference Types 






Variable Type 

Default Value 

Object reference 

null (not referencing any object) 

byte, short, int, long 

0 

float, double 

0.0 

boolean 

false 

char 

'\u0000' 


Primitive Instance Variables 

In the following example, the integer year is defined as a class member because it is within the initial 
curly braces of the class and not within a methods curly braces: 

public class BirthDate { 

int year; // Instance variable 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

BirthDate bd = new BirthDate(); 
bd.showYear(); 

} 

public void showYear() { 

System.out.println("The year is " + year); 

} 

} 

When the program is started, it gives the variable year a value of zero, the default value for primitive 
number instance variables. 


Its a good idea to initialize all your variables, even if youre assigning them with the default value. 
Your code will be easier to read; programmers who have to maintain your code (after you win the 
lottery and move to Tahiti) will be grateful. 

Object Reference Instance Variables 

When compared with uninitialized primitive variables, object references that arent initialized are a 
completely different story. Lets look at the following code: 

public class Book { 

private String title; // instance reference variable 

public String getTitleO { 
return title; 

} 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Book b = new Book(); 

System.out.println("The title is " + b.getTitle()); 

} 

} 










This code will compile fine. When we run it, the output is 


The title is null 


The title variable has not been explicitly initialized with a string assignment, so the instance 
variable value is null. Remember that null is not the same as an empty String (""). A null value means 
the reference variable is not referring to any object on the heap. The following modification to the Book 
code runs into trouble: 


public class Book { 

private String title; // 

public String getTitleO { 
return title; 

} 

public static void main(String [] 
Book b = new Book(); 

String s = b.getTitle(); // 

String t = s.toLowerCase(); // 

} 

} 


instance reference variable 


args) { 

Compiles and runs 
Runtime Exception! 


When we try to run the Book class, the JVM will produce something like this: 

Exception in thread "main" java.lang.NullPointerException 
at Book.main(Book.java:9) 


We get this error because the reference variable title does not point (refer) to an object. We can check 
to see whether an object has been instantiated by using the keyword null, as the following revised code 
shows: 

public class Book { 

private String title; // instance reference variable 

public String getTitleO { 
return title; 

} 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Book b = new Book(); 

String s = b.getTitle(); // Compiles and runs 

if (s != null) { 

String t = s.toLowerCase(); 

} 

} 

} 

The preceding code checks to make sure the object referenced by the variable s is not null before 
trying to use it. Watch out for scenarios on the exam where you might have to trace back through the code 
to find out whether an object reference will have a value of null. In the preceding code, for example, you 
look at the instance variable declaration for tide, see that theres no explicit initialization, recognize that 
the title variable will be given the default value of null, and then realize that the variable s will also 
have a value of null. Remember, the value of s is a copy of the value of title (as returned by the 
getTitleO method), so if title is a null reference, s will be, too. 


Array Instance Variables 

In Chapter 5 well be taking a very detailed look at declaring, constructing, and initializing arrays and 
multidimensional arrays. For now, were just going to look at the rule for an array elements default 
values. 

An array is an object; thus, an array instance variable thats declared but not explicidy initialized will 
have a value of null, just as any other object reference instance variable. But.. .if the array is initialized, 
what happens to the elements contained in the array? All array elements are given their default values 
the same default values that elements of that type get when theyre instance variables. The bottom line: 
Array elements are always, always, always given default values, regardless of where the array itself is 
instantiated. 

If we initialize an array, object reference elements will equal null if they are not initialized 
individually with values. If primitives are contained in an array, they will be given their respective 
default values. For example, in the following code, the array year will contain 100 integers that all equal 
to 0 (zero) by default: 

public class BirthDays { 

static int [] year = new int[100] ; 
public static void main(String [] args) { 
for(int i = 0;i<100;i++) 

System.out.println("year[" + i + "] = " + year[i]); 

} 

} 

When the preceding code runs, the output indicates that all 100 integers in the array have a value of 0. 


Local (Stack, Automatic) Primitives and Objects 

Local variables are defined within a method, and they include a methods parameters. 



 a t C h 


Automatic is just another term for local variable. It does not mean the automatic variable is 
automatically assigned a value! In fact, the opposite is true. An automatic variable must be 
assigned a value in the code or the compiler will complain. 


Local Primitives 

In the following time-travel simulator, the integer year is defined as an automatic variable because it is 
within the curly braces of a method: 




public class TimeTravel { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int year = 2 050; 

System.out.println("The year is " + year); 

} 

} 

Local variables, including primitives, always, always, always must be initialized before you attempt to 
use them (though not necessarily on the same line of code). Java does not give local variables a default 
value; you must explicidy initialize them with a value, as in the preceding example. If you try to use an 
uninitialized primitive in your code, youll get a compiler error: 

public class TimeTravel { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

int year; // Local variable (declared but not initialized) 

System.out.println("The year is " + year); // Compiler error 

} 

} 

Compiling produces output something like this: 

% j avac TimeTravel.java 

TimeTravel.java:4: Variable year may not have been initialized. 

System.out.println("The year is " + year); 

1 error 

To correct our code, we must give the integer year a value. In this updated example, we declare it on a 
separate line, which is perfectly valid: 

public class TimeTravel { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

int year; // Declared but not initialized 

int day; // Declared but not initialized 

System.out.println("You step into the portal."); 

year = 2050; // Initialize (assign an explicit value) 

System.out.println("Welcome to the year " + year); 

} 

} 

Notice in the preceding example we declared an integer called day that never gets initialized, yet the 
code compiles and runs fine. Legally, you can declare a local variable without initializing it as long as 
you dont use the variablebut, lets face it, if you declared it, you probably had a reason (although we 
have heard of programmers declaring random local variables just for sport, to see if they can figure out 
how and why theyre being used). 


The compiler cant always tell whether a local variable has been initialized before use. For 
example, if you initialize within a logically conditional block (in other words, a code block that may 
not run, such as an if block or for loop without a literal value of true or false in the test), the 
compiler knows that the initialization might not happen and can produce an error. The following 
code upsets the compiler: 



public class TestLocal { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int x; 

if (args [0] != null) { // assume you know this is true 

x = 7; // compiler can't tell that this 

// statement will run 

} 

int y = x; // the compiler will choke here 

}} 

The compiler will produce an error something like this: 

TestLocal.java:9: variable x might not have been initialized 

Because of the compiler-cant-tell-for-certain problem, you will sometimes need to initialize your 
variable outside the conditional block, just to make the compiler happy. You know why thats 
important if youve seen the bumper sticker, When the compilers not happy, aint nobody happy. 

Local Object References 

Objects references, too, behave differently when declared within a method rather than as instance 
variables. With instance variable object references, you can get away with leaving an object reference 
uninitialized, as long as the code checks to make sure the reference isnt null before using it. Remember, 
to the compiler, null is a value. You cant use the dot operator on a null reference, because there is no 
object at the other end of it, but a null reference is not the same as an uninitialized reference. Locally 
declared references cant get away with checking for null before use, unless you explicidy initialize the 
local variable to null. The compiler will complain about the following code: 

import java.util.Date; 
public class TimeTravel { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Date date; 
if (date == null) 

System.out.println("date is null"); 

}} 

Compiling the code results in an error similar to the following: 

% j avac TimeTravel.j ava 

TimeTravel.java:5: Variable date may not have been initialized, 
if (date == null) 

1 error 

Instance variable references are always given a default value of null, until they are explicitly 
initialized to something else. But local references are not given a default value; in other words, they 
arent null. If you dont initialize a local reference variable, then, by default, its value iswell thats the 
whole point: it doesnt have any value at all! So well make this simple: Just set the darn thing to null 
explicidy until youre ready to initialize it to something else. The following local variable will compile 
properly: 

Date date = null; // Explicitly set the local reference 

// variable to null 


Local Arrays 

Just like any other object reference, array references declared within a method must be assigned a value 
before use. That just means you must declare and construct the array. You do not, however, need to 
explicitly initialize the elements of an array. Weve said it before, but its important enough to repeat: 
Array elements are given their default values (0, false, null, '\u0000', and so on) regardless of 
whether the array is declared as an instance or local variable. The array object itself, however, will not 
be initialized if its declared locally. In other words, you must explicidy initialize an array reference if 
its declared and used within a method, but at the moment you construct an array object, all of its elements 
are assigned their default values. 

Assigning One Reference Variable to Another 

With primitive variables, an assignment of one variable to another means the contents (bit pattern) of one 
variable are copied into another. Object reference variables work exactly the same way. The contents of a 
reference variable are a bit pattern, so if you assign reference variable ai to reference variable bi, the bit 
pattern in ai is copied and the new copy is placed into bi. (Some people have created a game around 
counting how many times we use the word copy in this chapter.. .this copy concept is a biggie!) If we 
assign an existing instance of an object to a new reference variable, then two reference variables will 
hold the same bit patterna bit pattern referring to a specific object on the heap. Look at the following 
code: 


import java.awt.Dimension; 
class ReferenceTest { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Dimension al = new Dimension(5,10); 

System.out.println("al.height = " + al.height); 

Dimension bl = al; 
bl.height = 30; 

System.out.println("al.height = " + al.height + 

" after change to bl"); 

} 

} 

In the preceding example, a Dimension object al is declared and initialized with a width of 5 and a 
height of 10. Next, Dimension bl is declared and assigned the value of al. At this point, both variables 
(al and bl) hold identical values because the contents of al were copied into bl. There is still only one 
Dimension objectthe one that both al and bl refer to. Finally, the height property is changed using the 
bl reference. Now think for a minute: is this going to change the height property of al as well? Lets see 
what the output will be: 

%j ava ReferenceTest 
al.height = 10 

al.height = 30 after change to bl 

From this output, we can conclude that both variables refer to the same instance of the Dimension object. 
When we made a change to bl, the height property was also changed for al. 

One exception to the way object references are assigned is String. In Java, string objects are given 
special treatment. For one thing, string objects are immutable; you cant change the value of a string 
object (lots more on this concept in Chapter 6). But it sure looks as though you can. Examine the 


following code: 


class StringTest { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

String x = "Java"; // Assign a value to x 

String y = x; // Now y and x refer to the same 

// String object 

System.out.println("y string = " + y); 
x = x + " Bean"; // Now modify the object using 

// the x reference 
System.out.println("y string = " + y); 

} 

} 

Because Strings are objects, you might think St ring y will contain the characters Java Bean after 
the variable x is changed. Lets see what the output is: 

%java StringTest 
y string = Java 
y string = Java 

As you can see, even though y is a reference variable to the same object that x refers to, when we 
change x, it doesnt change y! For any other object type, where two references refer to the same object, if 
either reference is used to modify the object, both references will see the change because there is still 
only a single object. But any time we make any changes at all to a String, the VM will update the 
reference variable to refer to a different object. The different object might be a new object, or it might 
not be, but it will definitely be a different object. The reason we cant say for sure whether a new object 
is created is because of the string constant pool, which well cover in Chapter 6. 

You need to understand what happens when you use a St ring reference variable to modify a string: 

 A new string is created (or a matching St ring is found in the St ring pool), leaving the 
original string object untouched. 

n The reference used to modify the string (or rather, make a new string by modifying a copy 
of the original) is then assigned the brand-new string object. 

So when you say, 


1. 

String s = "Fred" 

/ 


2 . 

String t = s; 

// 

Now t and s refer to the same 



// 

String object 

3 . 

t.toUpperCase() ; 

// 

Invoke a String method that changes 



// 

the String 


you havent changed the original string object created on line 1. When line 2 completes, both t and s 
reference the same string object. But when line 3 runs, rather than modifying the object referred to by t 
and s (which is the one and only string object up to this point), a brand new string object is created. 
And then its abandoned. Because the new string isnt assigned to a string variable, the newly created 
String (which holds the string "FRED") is toast. So although two string objects were created in the 
preceding code, only one is actually referenced, and both t and s refer to it. The behavior of Strings is 
extremely important in the exam, so well cover it in much more detail in Chapter 6. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Passing Variables into Methods (OCA Objective 6.6) 

6.8 Determine the effect upon object references and primitive values when they are passed into 
methods that change the values. 

Methods can be declared to take primitives and/or object references. You need to know how (or if) the 
callers variable can be affected by the called method. The difference between object reference and 
primitive variables, when passed into methods, is huge and important. To understand this section, youll 
need to be comfortable with the information covered in the Literals, Assignments, and Variables section 
in the early part of this chapter. 


Passing Object Reference Variables 

When you pass an object variable into a method, you must keep in mind that youre passing the object 
reference, not the actual object itself. Remember that a reference variable holds bits that represent (to the 
underlying VM) a way to get to a specific object in memory (on the heap). More importandy, you must 
remember that you arent even passing the actual reference variable, but rather a copy of the reference 
variable. A copy of a variable means you get a copy of the bits in that variable, so when you pass a 
reference variable, youre passing a copy of the bits representing how to get to a specific object. In other 
words, both the caller and the called method will now have identical copies of the reference; thus, both 
will refer to the same exact (not a copy) object on the heap. 

For this example, well use the Dimension class from the java.awt package: 

1. import java.awt.Dimension; 

2. class ReferenceTest { 

3. public static void main (String [] args) { 

4. Dimension d = new Dimension(5,10); 

5. ReferenceTest rt = new ReferenceTest(); 

6. System.out.println("Before, d.height: " + d.height); 

7. rt.modify(d); 

8. System.out.println("After, d.height: " + d.height); 

9 - } 

10. void modify(Dimension dim) { 

11. dim.height = dim.height + 1; 

12. System.out.println("dim = " + dim.height); 

13. } } 

When we run this class, we can see the modify () method was, indeed, able to modify the original 
(and only) Dimension object created on line 4. 

C:\Java Projects\Reference>java ReferenceTest 

Before, d.height: 10 

dim = 11 

After, d.height: 11 

Notice when the Dimension object on line 4 is passed to the modify () method, any changes to the 
object that occur inside the method are being made to the object whose reference was passed. In the 



preceding example, reference variables d and dim both point to the same object. 


Does Java Use Pass-By-Value Semantics? 

If Java passes objects by passing the reference variable instead, does that mean Java uses pass-by- 
reference for objects? Not exacdy, although youll often hear and read that it does. Java is actually pass- 
by-value for all variables running within a single VM. Pass-by-value means pass-by-variable-value. And 
that means pass-by-copy-of-the-variable! (Theres that word copy again!) 

It makes no difference if youre passing primitive or reference variables; you are always passing a 
copy of the bits in the variable. So for a primitive variable, youre passing a copy of the bits representing 
the value. For example, if you pass an int variable with the value of 3, youre passing a copy of the bits 
representing 3. The called method then gets its own copy of the value to do with it what it likes. 

And if youre passing an object reference variable, youre passing a copy of the bits representing the 
reference to an object. The called method then gets its own copy of the reference variable to do with it 
what it likes. But because two identical reference variables refer to the exact same object, if the called 
method modifies the object (by invoking setter methods, for example), the caller will see that the object 
the callers original variable refers to has also been changed. In the next section, well look at how the 
picture changes when were talking about primitives. 

The bottom line on pass-by-value: The called method cant change the callers variable, although for 
object reference variables, the called method can change the object the variable referred to. Whats the 
difference between changing the variable and changing the object? For object references, it means the 
called method cant reassign the callers original reference variable and make it refer to a different object 
or null. For example, in the following code fragment, 

void bar () { 

Foo f = new Foo(); 
doStuff(f); 

} 

void doStuff(Foo g) { 
g.setName("Boo"); 
g = new Foo(); 

} 

reassigning g does not reassign f! At the end of the bar () method, two Foo objects have been created: 
one referenced by the local variable f and one referenced by the local (argument) variable g. Because the 
doStuf f () method has a copy of the reference variable, it has a way to get to the original Foo object, for 
instance to call the setName () method. But the doStuff () method does not have a way to get to the f 
reference variable. So doStuff () can change values within the object f refers to, but doStuff () cant 
change the actual contents (bit pattern) of f. In other words, doStuff () can change the state of the object 
that f refers to, but it cant make f refer to a different object! 


Passing Primitive Variables 

Lets look at what happens when a primitive variable is passed to a method: 


class ReferenceTest { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
int a = 1; 

ReferenceTest rt = new ReferenceTest(); 

System, out .println ("Before modifyO a = " + a) ; 
rt.modify(a); 

System, out .println ("After modifyO a = " + a) ; 

} 

void modify(int number) { 
number = number + 1; 

System.out.println("number = " + number); 

} 

} 

In this simple program, the variable a is passed to a method called modify(), which increments the 
variable by 1. The resulting output looks like this: 

Before modifyO a = 1 
number = 2 

After modifyO a = 1 

Notice that a did not change after it was passed to the method. Remember, it was a copy of a that was 
passed to the method. When a primitive variable is passed to a method, it is passed by value, which 
means pass-by-copy-of-the-bits-in-the-variable. 


FROM THE CLASSROOM 


The Shadowy World of Variables 

Just when you think youve got it all figured out, you see a piece of code with variables not behaving 
the way you think they should. You might have stumbled into code with a shadowed variable. You can 
shadow a variable in several ways. Well look at one way that might trip you up: hiding a static 
variable by shadowing it with a local variable. 

Shadowing involves reusing a variable name thats already been declared somewhere else. 

The effect of shadowing is to hide the previously declared variable in such a way that it may look as 
though youre using the hidden variable, but youre actually using the shadowing variable. You might 
find reasons to shadow a variable intentionally, but typically it happens by accident and causes hard- 
to-find bugs. On the exam, you can expect to see questions where shadowing plays a role. 

You can shadow a variable by declaring a local variable of the same name, either direcdy or as 
part of an argument: 















class Foo { 

static int size = 7; 
static void changelt(int size) { 
size = size + 200; 

System.out.println("size in changelt is " + size); 

} 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Foo f = new Foo(); 

System.out.println("size = " + size); 
changelt(size); 

System.out.println("size after changelt is " + size); 

} 

} 

The preceding code appears to change the static size variable in the changelt () method, but 
because changelt () has a parameter named size, the local size variable is modified while the static 
size variable is untouched. 

Running class Foo prints this: 

%java Foo 
size = 7 

size in changelt is 207 
size after changelt is 7 

Things become more interesting when the shadowed variable is an object reference, rather than a 
primitive: 

class Bar { 

int barNum = 28; 

} 

class Foo { 

Bar myBar = new Bar(); 
void changelt(Bar myBar) { 
myBar.barNum = 99; 

System.out.println("myBar.barNum in changelt is " + myBar.barNum); 
myBar = new Bar(); 
myBar.barNum = 420; 

System.out.println("myBar.barNum in changelt is now " + myBar.barNum); 

} 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

Foo f = new Foo(); 

System.out.println("f.myBar.barNum is " + f.myBar.barNum); 
f.changeIt(f.myBar); 

System.out.println("f.myBar.barNum after changelt is " 

+ f.myBar.barNum); 

} 

} 

The preceding code prints out this: 

f.myBar.barNum is 28 
myBar.barNum in changelt is 99 
myBar.barNum in changelt is now 420 
f.myBar.barNum after changelt is 99 


You can see that the shadowing variable (the local parameter myBar in changelt ()) can still 
affect the myBar instance variable, because the myBar parameter receives a reference to the same Bar 
object. But when the local myBar is reassigned a new Bar object, which we then modify by changing 
its barNum value, Foos original myBar instance variable is untouched. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Garbage Collection (OCA Objective 2.4) 

2.4 Explain an objects lifecycle (creation , dereference by reassignment, and garbage collection) 

The phrase garbage collection seems to come and go from the exam objectives. As of the OCA 8 
exam, its back, and were happy. Garbage collection is a well-known idea and a universal phrase in 
computer science. 


Overview of Memory Management and Garbage Collection 

This is the section youve been waiting for! Its finally time to dig into the wonderful world of memory 
management and garbage collection. 

Memory management is a crucial element in many types of applications. Consider a program that reads 
in large amounts of data, say from somewhere else on a network, and then writes that data into a database 
on a hard drive. A typical design would be to read the data into some sort of collection in memory, 
perform some operations on the data, and then write the data into the database. After the data is written 
into the database, the collection that stored the data temporarily must be emptied of old data or deleted 
and re-created before processing the next batch. This operation might be performed thousands of times, 
and in languages like C or C++ that do not offer automatic garbage collection, a small flaw in the logic 
that manually empties or deletes the collection data structures can allow small amounts of memory to be 
improperly reclaimed or lost. Forever. These small losses are called memory leaks, and over many 
thousands of iterations they can make enough memory inaccessible that programs will eventually crash. 
Creating code that performs manual memory management cleanly and thoroughly is a nontrivial and 
complex task, and while estimates vary, it is arguable that manual memory management can double the 
development effort for a complex program 

Javas garbage collector provides an automatic solution to memory management. In most cases it frees 
you from having to add any memory management logic to your application. The downside to automatic 
garbage collection is that you cant completely control when it runs and when it doesnt. 


Overview of Javas Garbage Collector 

Lets look at what we mean when we talk about garbage collection in the land of Java. From the 30,000- 
foot level, garbage collection is the phrase used to describe automatic memory management in Java. 
Whenever a software program executes (in Java, C, C++, Lisp, Ruby, and so on), it uses memory in 
several different ways. Were not going to get into Computer Science 101 here, but its typical for memory 
to be used to create a stack, a heap, in Javas case constant pools and method areas. The heap is that 
part of memory where Java objects live, and its the one and only part of memory that is in any way 









involved in the garbage collection process. 

Aheap is a heap is a heap. For the exam, its important that you know that you can call it the heap, you 
can call it the garbage collectible heap, or you can call it Johnson, but there is one and only one heap. 

So all garbage collection revolves around making sure the heap has as much free space as possible. 

For the purpose of the exam, what this boils down to is deleting any objects that are no longer reachable 
by the Java program running. Well talk more about what reachable means in a minute, but lets drill 
this point in. When the garbage collector runs, its purpose is to find and delete objects that cannot be 
reached. If you think of a Java program as being in a constant cycle of creating the objects it needs (which 
occupy space on the heap) and then discarding them when theyre no longer needed, creating new objects, 
discarding them, and so on, the missing piece of the puzzle is the garbage collector. When it runs, it looks 
for those discarded objects and deletes them from memory, so that the cycle of using memory and 
releasing it can continue. Ah, the great circle of life. 

When Does the Garbage Collector Run? 

The garbage collector is under the control of the JVM; the JVM decides when to run the garbage 
collector. From within your Java program, you can ask the JVM to run the garbage collector; but there are 
no guarantees, under any circumstances, that the JVM will comply. Left to its own devices, the JVM will 
typically run the garbage collector when it senses that memory is running low. Experience indicates that 
when your Java program makes a request for garbage collection, the JVM will usually grant your request 
in short order, but there are no guarantees. Just when you think you can count on it, the JVM will decide to 
ignore your request. 

How Does the Garbage Collector Work? 

You just cant be sure. You might hear that the garbage collector uses a mark and sweep algorithm, and for 
any given Java implementation that might be true, but the Java specification doesnt guarantee any 
particular implementation. You might hear that the garbage collector uses reference counting; once again, 
maybe yes, maybe no. The important concept for you to understand for the exam is: When does an object 
become eligible for garbage collection? 

In a nutshell, every Java program has from one to many threads. Each thread has its own little 
execution stack. Normally, you (the programmer) cause at least one thread to run in a Java program, the 
one with the main () method at the bottom of the stack. However, there are many really cool reasons to 
launch additional threads from your initial thread (which youll get into if you prepare for the OCP 8 
exam). In addition to having its own little execution stack, each thread has its own lifecycle. For now, all 
you need to know is that threads can be alive or dead. 

With this background information, we can now say with stunning clarity and resolve that an object is 
eligible for garbage collection when no live thread can access it. (Note: Due to the vagaries of the 
String constant pool, the exam focuses its garbage collection questions on non-St ring objects, and so 
our garbage collection discussions apply to only non-string objects too.) 

Based on that definition, the garbage collector performs some magical, unknown operations; and when 
it discovers an object that cant be reached by any live thread, it will consider that object as eligible for 
deletion, and it might even delete it at some point. (You guessed it: it also might never delete it.) When we 
talk about reaching an object, were really talking about having a reachable reference variable that refers 
to the object in question. If our Java program has a reference variable that refers to an object and that 
reference variable is available to a live thread, then that object is considered reachable. Well talk more 
about how objects can become unreachable in the following section. 



Can a Java application run out of memory? Yes. The garbage collection system attempts to remove 
objects from memory when they are not used. However, if you maintain too many live objects (objects 
referenced from other live objects), the system can run out of memory. Garbage collection cannot ensure 
that there is enough memory, only that the memory that is available will be managed as efficiendy as 
possible. 


Writing Code That Explicitly Makes Objects Eligible for Collection 

In the preceding section, you learned the theories behind Java garbage collection. In this section, we show 
how to make objects eligible for garbage collection using actual code. We also discuss how to attempt to 
force garbage collection if it is necessary and how you can perform additional cleanup on objects before 
they are removed from memory. 

Nulling a Reference 

As we discussed earlier, an object becomes eligible for garbage collection when there are no more 
reachable references to it. Obviously, if there are no reachable references, it doesnt matter what happens 
to the object. For our purposes it is just floating in space, unused, inaccessible, and no longer needed. 

The first way to remove a reference to an object is to set the reference variable that refers to the object 
to null. Examine the following code: 

1. public class GarbageTruck { 

2. public static void main(String [] args) { 

3. StringBuffer sb = new StringBuffer("hello"); 

4. System.out.println(sb); 

5. // The StringBuffer object is not eligible for collection 

6. sb = null; 

7. // Now the StringBuffer object is eligible for collection 

8 . } 

9 . } 

The StringBuffer object with the value hello is assigned to the reference variable sb in the third 
line. To make the object eligible (for garbage collection), we set the reference variable sb to null, which 
removes the single reference that existed to the StringBuffer object. Once line 6 has run, our happy 
little hello StringBuffer object is doomed, eligible for garbage collection. 

Reassigning a Reference Variable 

We can also decouple a reference variable from an object by setting the reference variable to refer to 
another object. Examine the following code: 

class GarbageTruck { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

StringBuffer si = new StringBuffer("hello" ) ; 

StringBuffer s2 = new StringBuffer("goodbye"); 

System.out.println(si); 

//At this point the StringBuffer "hello" is not eligible 
si = s2; // Redirects si to refer to the "goodbye" object 
// Now the StringBuffer "hello" is eligible for collection 

}} 


Objects that are created in a method also need to be considered. When a method is invoked, any local 
variables created exist only for the duration of the method. Once the method has returned, the objects 
created in the method are eligible for garbage collection. There is an obvious exception, however. If an 
object is returned from the method, its reference might be assigned to a reference variable in the method 
that called it; hence, it will not be eligible for collection. Examine the following code: 

import java.util.Date; 

public class GarbageFactory { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Date d = getDateO; 
doComplicatedStuff(); 

System.out.println("d = " + d) ; 

} 

public static Date getDateO { 

Date d2 = new Date(); 

StringBuffer now = new StringBuffer(d2.toString()); 

System.out.println(now); 
return d2; 

} 

} 

In the preceding example, we created a method called getDate( ) that returns a Date object. This 
method creates two objects: a Date and a StringBuffer containing the date information. Since the 
method returns a reference to the Date object and this reference is assigned to a local variable, it will not 
be eligible for collection even after the getDate( ) method has completed. The StringBuffer object, 
though, will be eligible, even though we didnt explicidy set the now variable to null. 

Isolating a Reference 

There is another way in which objects can become eligible for garbage collection, even if they still have 
valid references! We call this scenario islands of isolation. 

A simple example is a class that has an instance variable that is a reference variable to another 
instance of the same class. Now imagine that two such instances exist and that they refer to each other. If 
all other references to these two objects are removed, then even though each object still has a valid 
reference, there will be no way for any live thread to access either object. When the garbage collector 
runs, it can usually discover any such islands of objects and remove them As you can imagine, such 
islands can become quite large, theoretically containing hundreds of objects. Examine the following code: 


public class Island { 

Island i; 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Island i2 = new Island(); 

Island i3 = new Island(); 

Island i4 = new IslandO; 


i2 . i 

= i3; 

// 

i2 

refers 

to 

i3 

i3 .i 

= i4 ; 

// 

i3 

refers 

to 

i4 

i4 .i 

= i2; 

// 

i4 

refers 

to 

i2 

i2 = 

null; 






i3 = 

null; 






i4 = 

null; 







//do complicated, memory intensive stuff 

} 

} 

When the code reaches // do complicated, the three Island objects (previously known as i2, i3, 
and i4) have instance variables so that they refer to each other, but their links to the outside world (i2, 
i3, and i4) have been nulled. These three objects are eligible for garbage collection. 

This covers everything you will need to know about making objects eligible for garbage collection. 
Study Figure 3-2 to reinforce the concepts of objects without references and islands of isolation. 



public class Island ( 

Island n; 

public static void main(String 
Island i2 = new Island() 
Island i3 = new Island() 
Island i4 = new Island() 

12. n = i3; 

13. n = i4; 

14. n = i2; 

12 = null; 

13 = null; 

14 = null; 
doComplexStuff(); 


Indicated an 
active reference 

~~ 0 - 


args) 


i4 


i- 


The 


heap 


Lost 


Object 


public class Lost ( 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
Lost x = new Lost (); 
x = null; 
doComplexStuff(); 


Indicates a 


} 


deleted reference 


} 


FIGURE 3-2 


Island objects eligible 


for garbage collection 


Forcing Garbage Collection 

The first thing that we should mention here is that, contrary to this sections tide, garbage collection 
cannot be forced. However, Java provides some methods that allow you to request that the JVM perform 
garbage collection. 

Note: The Java garbage collector has evolved to such an advanced state that its recommended that you 
never invoke System . gc () in your codeleave it to the JVM. 

In reality, it is possible only to suggest to the JVM that it perform garbage collection. However, there 
are no guarantees the JVM will actually remove all of the unused objects from memory (even if garbage 
collection is run). It is essential that you understand this concept for the exam 

The garbage collection routines that Java provides are members of the Runtime class. The Runtime 
class is a special class that has a single object (a Singleton) for each main program The Runtime 
object provides a mechanism for communicating directly with the virtual machine. To get the Runtime 
instance, you can use the method Runtime. getRuntime( ), which returns the Singleton. Once you have 



















the Singleton, you can invoke the garbage collector using the gc () method. Alternatively, you can call 
the same method on the System class, which has static methods that can do the work of obtaining the 
Singleton for you. The simplest way to ask for garbage collection (rememberjust a request) is 

System.gc(); 

Theoretically, after calling System. gc(), you will have as much free memory as possible. We say 
theoretically because this routine does not always work that way. First, your JVM may not have 
implemented this routine; the language specification allows this routine to do nothing at all. Second, 
another thread might grab lots of memory right after you run the garbage collector. 

This is not to say that System. gc() is a useless methodits much better than nothing. You just cant 
rely on System. gc () to free up enough memory so that you dont have to worry about running out of 
memory. The Certification Exam is interested in guaranteed behavior, not probable behavior. 

Now that you are somewhat familiar with how this works, lets do a little experiment to see the effects 
of garbage collection. The following program lets us know how much total memory the JVM has 
available to it and how much free memory it has. It then creates 10,000 Date objects. After this, it tells us 
how much memory is left and then calls the garbage collector (which, if it decides to run, should halt the 
program until all unused objects are removed). The final free memory result should indicate whether it 
has run. Lets look at the program: 

1. import java.util.Date; 

2. public class CheckGC { 

3. public static void main(String [] args) { 

4. Runtime rt = Runtime.getRuntime(); 

5. System.out.println("Total JVM memory: " 

+ rt.totalMemory()); 

6. System.out.println("Before Memory = " 

+ rt.freeMemory()); 

7. Date d = null; 

8. for(int i = 0;i<10000;i + + ) { 

9. d = new Date () ; 

10. d = null; 

11. } 

12. System.out.println("After Memory = " 

+ rt.freeMemory()); 

13. rt.gc(); // an alternate to System.gc() 

14. System.out.println("After GC Memory = " 

+ rt.freeMemory()); 

15. } 

16. } 

Now, let's run the program and check the results: 

Total JVM memory: 1048568 

Before Memory = 703008 

After Memory = 458048 

After GC Memory = 818272 

As you can see, the JVM actually did decide to garbage collect (that is, delete) the eligible objects. In 
the preceding example, we suggested that the JVM perform garbage collection with 458,048 bytes of 
memory remaining, and it honored our request. This program has only one user thread running, so there 
was nothing else going on when we called r t. gc (). Keep in mind that the behavior when gc () is called 


maybe different for different JVMs; hence, there is no guarantee that the unused objects will be removed 
from memory. About the only thing you can guarantee is that if you are running very low on memory, the 
garbage collector will run before it throws an OutOfMemoryException. 


EXERCISE 3-2 


Garbage Collection Experiment 

Try changing the CheckGC program by putting lines 13 and 14 inside a loop. You might see that not all 
memory is released on any given run of the GC. 

.... 1 H|. 

Cleaning Up Before Garbage Collectionthe finalize() Method 

Java provides a mechanism that lets you run some code just before your object is deleted by the garbage 
collector. This code is located in a method named finalize () that all classes inherit from class Ob j ect. 
On the surface, this sounds like a great idea; maybe your object opened up some resources, and youd like 
to close them before your object is deleted. The problem is that, as you may have gathered by now, you 
can never count on the garbage collector to delete an object. So, any code that you put into your classs 
overridden finalize! ) method is not guaranteed to run. Because the finalize! ) method for any given 
object might run, but you cant count on it, dont put any essential code into your finalize ( ) method. In 
fact, we recommend that, in general, you dont override finalize! ) at all. 

THcky Little finalize() Gotchas 

There are a couple of concepts concerning finalize () that you need to remember: 

 For any given object, finalize!) will be called only once (at most) by the garbage 
collector. 

 Calling finalize () can actually result in saving an object from deletion. 

Lets examine these statements a little further. First of all, remember that any code you can put into a 
normal method you can put into finalize!). For example, in the finalize!) method you could write 
code that passes a reference to the object in question back to another object, effectively ineligible-izing 
the object for garbage collection. If at some later point this same object becomes eligible for garbage 
collection again, the garbage collector can still process the object and delete it. The garbage collector, 
however, will remember that, for this object, finalize! ) already ran, and it will not run finalize!) 
again. 


CERTIFICATION SUMMARY 

This chapter covered a wide range of topics. Dont worry if you have to review some of these topics as 
you get into later chapters. This chapter includes a lot of foundational stuff that will come into play later. 

We started the chapter by reviewing the stack and the heap; remember that local variables live on the 
stack and instance variables live with their objects on the heap. 

We reviewed legal literals for primitives and Strings, and then we discussed the basics of assigning 






values to primitives and reference variables and the rules for casting primitives. 

Next we discussed the concept of scope, or How long will this variable live? Remember the four 
basic scopes in order of lessening life span: static, instance, local, and block. 

We covered the implications of using uninitialized variables and the importance of the fact that local 
variables MUST be assigned a value explicidy. We talked about some of the tricky aspects of assigning 
one reference variable to another and some of the finer points of passing variables into methods, including 
a discussion of shadowing. 

Finally, we dove into garbage collection, Javas automatic memory management feature. We learned 
that the heap is where objects live and where all the cool garbage collection activity takes place. We 
learned that in the end, the JVM will perform garbage collection whenever it wants to. You (the 
programmer) can request a garbage collection run, but you cant force it. We talked about garbage 
collection only applying to objects that are eligible, and that eligible means inaccessible from any live 
thread. Finally, we discussed the rarely useful finalize () method and what youll have to know about 
it for the exam. All in all, this was one fascinating chapter. 


/ TWO-MINUTE DRILL 

Here are some of the key points from this chapter. 

Stack and Heap 

? Local variables (method variables) live on the stack. 

? Objects and their instance variables live on the heap. 

Literals and Primitive Casting (OCA Objective 2.1) 

? Integer literals can be binary, decimal, octal (such as 013), or hexadecimal (such as 0x3d). 

? Literals for longs end in L or 1. (For the sake of readability, we recommend L.) 

? Float literals end in F or f, and double literals end in a digit or D or d. 

? The boolean literals are true and false. 

? Literals for chars are a single character inside single quotes: ' d'. 

Scope (OCA Objective 1.1) 

? Scope refers to the lifetime of a variable. 

? There are four basic scopes: 

? Static variables live basically as long as their class lives. 

? Instance variables live as long as their object lives. 

? Local variables live as long as their method is on the stack; however, if their method 
invokes another method, they are temporarily unavailable. 

? Block variables (for example, in a for or an if) live until the block completes. 


Basic Assignments (OCA Objectives 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3) 

? Literal integers are implicitly ints. 

? Integer expressions always result in an int-sized result, never smaller. 

? Floating-point numbers are implicitly doubles (64 bits). 

? Narrowing a primitive truncates the high order bits. 

? Compound assignments (such as +=) perform an automatic cast. 

? A reference variable holds the bits that are used to refer to an object. 

? Reference variables can refer to subclasses of the declared type but not to superclasses. 

? When you create a new object, such as Button b = new Button ();, the JVM does three 
things: 

? Makes a reference variable named b, of type Button. 

? Creates a new Button object. 

? Assigns the Button object to the reference variable b. 

Using a Variable or Array Element That Is Uninitialized and Unassigned (OCA 
Objectives 4.1 and 4.2) 

? When an array of objects is instantiated, objects within the array are not instantiated 
automatically, but all the references get the default value of null. 

? When an array of primitives is instantiated, elements get default values. 

? Instance variables are always initialized with a default value. 

? Local/automatic/method variables are never given a default value. If you attempt to use one 
before initializing it, youll get a compiler error. 

Passing Variables into Methods (OCA Objective 6.6) 

? Methods can take primitives and/or object references as arguments. 

? Method arguments are always copies. 

? Method arguments are never actual objects (they can be references to objects). 

? A primitive argument is an unattached copy of the original primitive. 

? A reference argument is another copy of a reference to the original object. 

? Shadowing occurs when two variables with different scopes share the same name. This leads 
to hard-to-find bugs and hard-to-answer exam questions. 

Garbage Collection (OCA Objective 2.4) 

? In Java, garbage collection (GC) provides automated memory management. 

? The purpose of GC is to delete objects that cant be reached. 

? Only the JVM decides when to run the GC; you can only suggest it. 

? You cant know the GC algorithm for sure. 


? Objects must be considered eligible before they can be garbage collected. 

? An object is eligible when no live thread can reach it. 

? To reach an object, you must have a live, reachable reference to that object. 

? Java applications can run out of memory. 

? Islands of objects can be garbage collected, even though they refer to each other. 

? Request garbage collection with System.gc();. 

? The Object class has a finalize () method. 

? The finalize!) method is guaranteed to run once and only once before the garbage collector 
deletes an object. 

? The garbage collector makes no guarantees; finalize!) may never run. 

? You can ineligible-ize an object for GC from within finalize!). 


SELF TEST 


1. Given: 

class CardBoard { 

Short story = 200; 

CardBoard go(CardBoard cb) { 
cb = null; 
return cb; 

} 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

CardBoard cl = new CardBoardO; 

CardBoard c2 = new CardBoardO; 

CardBoard c3 = cl.go(c2); 
cl = null; 

// do Stuff 

} } 

When / / do stuff is reached, how many objects are eligible for garbage collection? 

A. 0 

B. 1 

C. 2 

D. Compilation fails 

E. It is not possible to know 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 


2. Given: 


public class Fishing { 
byte bl = 4; 
int il = 123456; 
long LI = (long)il; 
short s2 = (short)il; 
byte b2 = (byte)il; 
int i2 = (int)123.456; 
byte b3 = bl + 7; 

} 


// line A 
// line B 
// line C 
// line D 
// line E 


Which lines WILL NOT compile? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Line A 

B. Line B 

C. Line C 

D. Line D 

E. Line E 


3. Given: 

public class Literally { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 


int 

il = 1_0 0 0; 

// 

line 

A 

int 

i2 = 10_0 0; 

// 

line 

B 

int 

i3 = _10_0 0 0; 

// 

line 

C 

int 

i4 = Obi01010; 

// 

line 

D 

int 

i5 = 0B10_1010; 

// 

line 

E 

int 

i6 = 0x2_a; 

// 

line 

F 


Which lines WILL NOT compile? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Line A 

B. Line B 

C. Line C 

D. Line D 

E. Line E 

F. Line F 


4. Given: 


class Mixer { 

Mixer () { } 

Mixer(Mixer m) { ml = m; } 

Mixer re 
public static void main(String[] args) { 

Mixer m2 = new Mixer(); 

Mixer m3 = new Mixer(m2); m3.go(); 

Mixer m4 = m3.ml; m4.go(); 

Mixer m5 = m2.ml; m5.go(); 

} 

void go() { System.out.print("hi "); } 

} 

What is the result? 

A. hi 

B. hi hi 

C. hi hi hi 

D. Compilation fails 

E. hi, followed by an exception 

F. hi hi, followed by an exception 

5. Given: 

class Fizz { 
int x = 5; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
final Fizz fl = new Fizz(); 

Fizz f2 = new Fizz(); 

Fizz f3 = FizzSwitch(f1,f2); 

System.out.println((fl == f3) + " " + (fl.x == f3.x)); 

} 

static Fizz FizzSwitch(Fizz x, Fizz y) { 
final Fizz z = x; 
z . x = 6 ; 
return z; 

} } 

What is the result? 

A. true true 

B. false true 

C. true false 

D. false false 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 


6. Given: 



public class Mirror { 
int size = 7; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Mirror ml = new Mirror(); 

Mirror m2 = ml; 
int il = 10; 
int i2 = il; 
go(m2, i2); 

System.out.println(ml.size + " " + il); 

} 

static void go(Mirror m, int i) { 
m.size = 8; 
i = 12; 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. 7 10 

B. 8 10 

C. 7 12 

D. 8 12 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 

7. Given: 

public class Wind { 
int id; 

Wind(int i) { id = i; } 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
new Wind(3).go(); 

// commented line 

} 

void go() { 

Wind wl = new Wind(l); 

Wind w2 = new Wind(2); 

System.out.println(wl.id + " " + w2.id); 

} 

} 

When execution reaches the commented line, which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. The output contains l 

B. The output contains 2 

C. The output contains 3 

D. Zero Wind objects are eligible for garbage collection 

E. One Wind object is eligible for garbage collection 

F. Two Wind objects are eligible for garbage collection 

G. Three Wind objects are eligible for garbage collection 


8. Given: 

3. public class Ouch { 

4. static int ouch = 7; 

5. public static void main(String[] args) 


6 . 

new Ouch().go(ouch); 


7 . 

System.out.print(" " + 

ouch); 

8 . 

} 


9 . 

void go(int ouch) { 


10 . 

ouch++; 


11. 

for(int ouch = 3; ouch 

< 6; ouch++) 

12 . 



13 . 

System.out.print(" " + 

ouch); 

14 . 

} 


15 . 

} 


the result? 



A. 5 7 

B. 5 8 

C. 8 7 

D. 8 8 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 

9. Given: 

public class Happy { 
int id; 

Happy(int i) { id = i; } 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
Happy hi = new Happy(1); 

Happy h2 = hi.go(hi); 

System.out.println(h2.id); 

} 

Happy go(Happy h) { 

Happy h3 = h; 
h3.id = 2; 
hi.id = 3; 
return hi; 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. l 

B. 2 

C. 3 

D. Compilation fails 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 


10. Given: 


public class Network { 

Network(int x, Network n) { 
id = x; 
p = this; 

if(n != null) p = n; 

} 

int id; 

Network p; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Network nl = new Network(1, null); 
nl.go(nl); 

} 

void go(Network nl) { 

Network n2 = new Network(2, nl) ; 

Network n3 = new Network(3, n2); 

System.out.printIn(n3.p.p.id); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. l 

B. 2 

C. 3 

D. null 

E. Compilation fails 
11. Given: 

3. class Beta { } 

4. class Alpha { 

5. static Beta bl; 

6. Beta b2; 

7 - } 

8. public class Tester { 

9. public static void main(String[] args) { 

10. Beta bl = new Beta(); Beta b2 = new Beta(); 

11. Alpha al = new Alpha(); Alpha a2 = new Alpha(); 

12. al.bl = bl; 

13. al.b2 = bl; 

14. a2.b2 = b2; 

15. al = null; bl = null; b2 = null; 

16. // do stuff 

17. } 

18. } 

When line 16 is reached, how many objects will be eligible for garbage collection? 
A. 0 


C. 2 

D. 3 

E. 4 

F. 5 

12. Given: 

public class Telescope { 

static int magnify = 2; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
go () ; 

} 

static void go() { 

int magnify = 3; 
zoomln(); 

} 

static void zoomln() { 

magnify *= 5; 
zoomMore(magnify); 

System.out.println(magnify); 

} 

static void zoomMore(int magnify) { 
magnify *= 7; 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. 2 

B. 10 

C. 15 

D. 30 

E. 70 

F. 105 

G. Compilation fails 


13. Given: 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 


public class Dark { 
int x = 3; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 


new Dark().gol(); 


void gol() { 

int x; 
go2(++x); 


void go2(int y) { 
int x = ++y; 

System.out.println(x); 


15. } 

16. } 

What is the result? 

A. 2 

B. 3 

C. 4 

D. 5 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 


SELF TEST ANSWERS 


1. 0 C is correct. Only one CardBoard object (cl) is eligible, but it has an associated Short 
wrapper object that is also eligible. 

S3 A, B, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 2.4) 

2. 0 E is correct; compilation of line E fails. When a mathematical operation is performed on 
any primitives smaller than ints, the result is automatically cast to an integer. 

3 A, B, C, and D are all legal primitive casts. (OCA Objective 2.1) 

3. 0 C is correct; line C will NOT compile. As of Java 7, underscores can be included in 
numeric literals, but not at the beginning or the end. 

3 A, B, D, E, and F are incorrect. A and B are legal numeric literals. D and E are examples of 
valid binary literals, which were new to Java 7, and F is a valid hexadecimal literal that uses an 
underscore. (OCAObjective 2.1) 

4. 0 F is correct. The m2 objects ml instance variable is never initialized, so when m5 tries to 
use it, a NullPointerException is thrown. 

3 A, B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 2.1 and 2.3) 

5. 0 A is correct. The references f l, z, and f 3 all refer to the same instance of Fizz. The final 
modifier assures that a reference variable cannot be referred to a different object, but final 
doesnt keep the objects state from changing. 

3 B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 2.2) 


6. 0 B is correct. In the go () method, m refers to the single Mirror instance, but the int i is a 
new int variable, a detached copy of i2. 

S3 A, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 2.2 and 2.3) 

7. 0 A, B, and G are correct. The constructor sets the value of id for wl and w2. When the 
commented line is reached, none of the three wind objects can be accessed, so they are eligible to 
be garbage collected. 

S3 C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 1.1, 2.3, and 2.4) 

8. 0 E is correct. The parameter declared on line 9 is valid (although ugly), but the variable 
name ouch cannot be declared again on line 11 in the same scope as the declaration on line 9. 

S3 A, B, C, D, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 1.1 and 2.1) 

9. 0 D is correct. Inside the go() method, hi is out of scope. 

3 A, B, C, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 1.1 and 6.1) 

10. 0 A is correct. Three Network objects are created. The n2 object has a reference to the nl 
object, and the n3 object has a reference to the n2 object. The S.O.P. can be read as, Use the n3 
objects Network reference (the first p), to find that objects reference (n2), and use that objects 
reference (the second p) to find that objects (nls) id, and print that id. 

3 B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives, 2.2, 2.3, and 6.4) 

11. 0 B is correct. It should be clear that there is still a reference to the object referred to by a2, 
and that there is still a reference to the object referred to by a2. b2. What might be less clear is that 
you can still access the other Beta object through the static variable a2. bibecause its static. 

3 A, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 2.4) 

12. 0B is correct. In the Telescope class, there are three different variables named magnify. 
The go( ) methods version and the zoomMore( ) methods version are not used in the zoomln( ) 
method. The zoomln () method multiplies the class variable * 5. The result (10) is sent to 
zoomMore( ), but what happens in zoomMore( ) stays in zoomMore( ). The S.O.P. prints the value of 
zoomln ()s magnify. 

3 A, C, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 1.1 and 6.6) 

13. 0 E is correct. In gol( ) the local variable x is not initialized. 

3 A, B, C, D, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 2.1 and 2.3) 




4 

Operators 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES 


 Using Java Operators 

 Use Parentheses to Override Operator Precedence 

 Test Equality Between Strings and Other Objects Using == and equals() 

/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 


I f youve got variables, youre going to modify them. (Unless youre one of those new-fangled FP 
programmers.) Youll increment them, add them together, and compare one to another (in about a 
dozen different ways). In this chapter, youll learn how to do all that in Java. As an added bonus, 
youll learn how to do things that youll probably never use in the real world, but that will almost 
certainly be on the exam. 




CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Java Operators (OCA Objectives 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) 

3.1 Use Java operators; including parentheses to override operator precedence. 

3.2 Test equality between Strings and other objects using = = and equals(). 

3.3 Create if and if/else and ternary constructs 

Java operators produce new values from one or more operands. (Just so were all clear, remember that 
operands are the things on the right or left side of the operator.) The result of most operations is either a 
boolean or numeric value. Because you know by now that Java is not C++, you wont be surprised that 
Java operators arent typically overloaded. There are, however, a few exceptional operators that come 
overloaded: 

m The + operator can be used to add two numeric primitives together or to perform a 
concatenation operation if either operand is a String. 

m The &, |, and A operators can all be used in two different ways, although on this version of the 
exam, their bit-twiddling capabilities wont be tested. 

Stay awake. Operators are often the section of the exam where candidates see their lowest scores. 
Additionally, operators and assignments are a part of many questions dealing with other topicsit would 




be a shame to nail a really tricky lambdas question only to blow it on a pre-increment statement. 


Assignment Operators 

We covered most of the functionality of the equal (=) assignment operator in Chapter 3. To summarize: 

i When assigning a value to a primitive, size matters. Be sure you know when implicit casting 
will occur, when explicit casting is necessary, and when truncation might occur. 

 Remember that a reference variable isnt an object; its a way to get to an object. (We know 
all you C++ programmers are just dying for us to say, its a pointer, but were not going to.) 

i When assigning a value to a reference variable, type matters. Remember the rules for 
supertypes, subtypes, and arrays. 

Next well cover a few more details about the assignment operators that are on the exam, and when we 
get to the next chapter, well take a look at how the assignment operator = works with strings (which are 
immutable). 



 a t c h 


Dont spend time preparing for topics that are no longer on the exam! The following topics 
have NOT been on the exam since Java 1.4: 

m Bit-shifting operators 

 Bitwise operators 
m Twos complement 

 Divide-by-zero stuff 

Its not that these arent important topics; its just that theyre not on the exam anymore, and 
were really focused on the exam. (Note: The reason we bring this up at all is because you 
might encounter mock exam questions on these topicsyou can ignore those questions!) 


Compound Assignment Operators 

There are actually 11 or so compound assignment operators, but only the 4 most commonly used (+=, -=, 
*=, and /=) are on the exam. The compound assignment operators let lazy typists shave a few keystrokes 
off their workload. 

Here are several example assignments, first without using a compound operator: 

y = y - 6; 

x = x + 2 * 5; 

Now, with compound operators: 


y 


= 6 ; 




x + 2 * 5; 


The last two assignments give the same result as the first two. 


Relational Operators 

The exam covers six relational operators (<, <=, >, >=, ==, and ! =). Relational operators always result in 
a boolean (true or false) value. This boolean value is most often used in an if test, as follows: 

int x = 8; 
if (x < 9) { 

// do something 

} 

But the resulting value can also be assigned directly to a boolean primitive: 

class CompareTest { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
boolean b = 100 > 99; 

System.out.println("The value of b is " + b); 

} 

} 

Java has four relational operators that can be used to compare any combination of integers, floating 
point numbers, or characters: 

 > Greater than 

 >= Greater than or equal to 

 < Less than 

<= Less than or equal to 

Lets look at some legal comparisons: 

class GuessAnimal { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

String animal = "unknown"; 
int weight = 700; 
char sex = 'm'; 

double colorWaveLength = 1.630; 

if (weight >= 500) { animal = "elephant"; } 

if (colorWaveLength > 1.621) { animal = "gray " + animal; } 

if (sex <= 'f') { animal = "female " + animal; } 

System.out.println("The animal is a " + animal); 

} 

} 

In the preceding code, we are using a comparison between characters. Its also legal to compare a 
character primitive with any number (although it isnt great programming style). Running the preceding 
class will output the following: 


The animal is a gray elephant 


We mentioned that characters can be used in comparison operators. When comparing a character with 
a character or a character with a number, Java will use the Unicode value of the character as the 
numerical value for comparison. 

"Equality Operators 

Java also has two relational operators (sometimes called equality operators) that compare two similar 
things and return a boolean (true or false) that represents whats true about the two things being 
equal. These operators are 

 == Equal (also known as equal to) 

 ! = Not equal (also known as not equal to) 

Each individual comparison can involve two numbers (including char), two boolean values, or two 
object reference variables. You cant compare incompatible types, however. What would it mean to ask if 
a boolean is equal to a char? Or if a Button is equal to a string array? (This is nonsense, which is 
why you cant do it.) There are four different types of things that can be tested: 

>j Numbers 

 Characters 

I Boolean primitives 

 Object reference variables 

So what does == look at? The value in the variablein other words, the bit pattern. 

Equality for Primitives 

Most programmers are familiar with comparing primitive values. The following code shows some 
equality tests on primitive variables: 

class ComparePrimitives { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

System.out.printIn("char 'a' == 'a'? " + ('a' == 'a')); 

System.out.printIn("char 'a' == ' b*? " + ('a' == ' b  ) ) ; 

System.out.printIn("5 != 6? " + (5 != 6)); 

System.out.printIn("5.0 == 5L? " + (5.0 == 5L) ) ; 

System.out.printIn("true == false? " + (true == false)); 

} 

} 

This program produces the following output: 

char 'a' == 'a'? true 
char 'a* == 'b'? false 
5 != 6? true 
5.0 == 5L? true 
true == false? false 


As you can see, if a floating-point number is compared with an integer and the values are the same, the 
== operator usually returns true as expected. 

Equality for Reference Variables 

As you saw earlier, two reference variables can refer to the same object, as the following code snippet 
demonstrates: 

JButton a = new JButton("Exit"); 

JButton b = a; 



atch 


Dont mistake = for == in a boolean expression. The following is legal: 

11. boolean b = false; 

12. if (b = true) { System.out.println( M b is true"); 

13. } else { System.out.println("b is false"); } 

Look carefully! You might be tempted to think the output is b is false, but look at the 
boolean test in line 12. The boolean variable b is not being compared to true; its being set to 
true. Once b is set to true, the println executes and we get b is true. The result of any 
assignment expression is the value of the variable following the assignment. This substitution 
of = for == works only with boolean variables because the if test can be done only on boolean 
expressions. Thus, this does not compile: 

7. int x = 1; 

8. if (x = 0) { } 

Because x is an integer (and not a boolean), the result of (x = 0) is 0 (the result of the 
assignment). Primitive ints cannot be used where a boolean value is expected, so the code in 
line 8 wont work unless its changed from an assignment (=) to an equality test (==) as 
follows: 

8. if (x == 0) { } 


After running this code, both variable a and variable b will refer to the same object (a JButton with 
the label Exit). Reference variables can be tested to see if they refer to the same object by using the == 
operator. Remember, the == operator is looking at the bits in the variable, so for reference variables, this 
means that if the bits in both reference variables are identical, then both refer to the same object. Look at 
the following code: 




import j avax.swing.JButton; 
class CompareReference { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

JButton a = new JButton("Exit"); 

JButton b = new JButton("Exit M ); 

JButton c = a; 

System.out.println("Is reference a == b? " + (a == b) ) ; 

System.out.println("Is reference a == c? " + (a == c)); 

} 

} 

This code creates three reference variables. The first two, a and b, are separate JButton objects that 
happen to have the same label. The third reference variable, c, is initialized to refer to the same object 
that a refers to. When this program runs, the following output is produced: 

Is reference a == b? false 
Is reference a == c? true 

This shows us that a and c reference the same instance of a JButton. The == operator will not test 
whether two objects are meaningfully equivalent, a concept well cover in much more detail in Chapter 
6, when we look at the equals () method (as opposed to the equals operator were looking at here). 

Equality for Strings and java.lang.Object.equals() 

We just used == to determine whether two reference variables refer to the same object. Because objects 
are so central to Java, every class in Java inherits a method from class Ob j ect that tests to see if two 
objects of the class are equal. Not surprisingly, this method is called equals (). In this case of the 
equals () method, the phrase meaningfully equivalent should be used instead of the word equal. So 
the equals () method is used to determine if two objects of the same class are meaningfully equivalent. 
For classes that you create, you have the option of overriding the equals () method that your class 
inherited from class Ob j ect and creating your own definition of meaningfully equivalent for instances 
of your class. 

In terms of understanding the equals () method for the OCA exam, you need to understand two aspects 
of the equals () method: 

I What equals() means in class Object 
I Whatequals() means in class String 

The equals() Method in Class Object The equals() method in class object works the same 
way that the == operator works. If two references point to the same object, the equals () method will 
return true. If two references point to different objects, even if they have the same values, the method will 
return false. 

The equals() Method in Class String The equals() method in class string has been 
overridden. When the equals () method is used to compare two strings, it will return true if the strings 
have the same value, and it will return false if the strings have different values. For St rings equals () 
method, values ARE case sensitive. 

Lets take a look at how the equals () method works in action (notice that the Budgie class did NOT 
override Object. equals()): 


{ 


class Budgie { 

public static void main(String[] args) 


// lower case "b" 

// false, different objects 
// true, same objects 
// true, same values 

// false, values are case sensitive 

} 

which produces the output: 

false 

true 

true 

false 


Budgie bl = new Budgie(); 

Budgie b2 = new Budgie(); 

Budgie b3 = bl; 

String si = "Bob"; 

String s2 = "Bob"; 

String s3 = "bob"; 

System.out.printIn(bl.equals(b2)) 
System.out.println(bl.equals(b3)) 
System.out.println(si.equals(s2)) 
System.out.println(si.equals(s3)) 


Equality for enums 

Once youve declared an enum, its not expandable. At runtime, theres no way to make additional enum 
constants. Of course, you can have as many variables as youd like refer to a given enum constant, so its 
important to be able to compare two enum reference variables to see if theyre equalthat is, do they 
refer to the same enum constant? You can use either the == operator or the equals () method to determine 
whether two variables are referring to the same enum constant: 

class EnumEqual { 

enum Color {RED, BLUE} // ; is optional 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Color cl = Color.RED; Color c2 = Color.RED; 

if(cl == c2) { System.out.println("==") ; } 

if(cl.equals(c2)) { System.out.println("dot equals"); } 

} } 

(We know } } is ugly; were prepping you.) This produces the output: 


dot equals 


instanceof Comparison 

The instanceof operator is used for object reference variables only, and you can use it to check whether 
an object is of a particular type. By type, we mean class or interface typein other words, whether the 
object referred to by the variable on the left side of the operator passes the IS-A test for the class or 
interface type on the right side. (Chapter 2 covered IS-A relationships in detail.) The following simple 
example, 




public static void main(String[] args) { 

String s = new String( M foo"); 
if (s instanceof String) { 

System.out.print("s is a String"); 

} 

} 

prints this: 

s is a String 

Even if the object being tested is not an actual instantiation of the class type on the right side of the 
operator, instanceof will still return true if the object being compared is assignment compatible with 
the type on the right. 

The following example demonstrates a common use for instanceof: testing an object to see if its an 
instance of one of its subtypes before attempting a downcast: 

class A { } 

class B extends A { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 

A myA = new B () ; 
m2(myA); 

} 

public static void m2(A a) { 
if (a instanceof B) 

((B)a).doBstuff(); // downcasting an A reference 

// to a B reference 

} 

public static void doBstuff() { 

System.out.println("'a' refers to a B"); 

} 

} 

The code compiles and produces this output: 

'a' refers to a B 

In examples like this, the use of the instanceof operator protects the program from attempting an 
illegal downcast. 

You can test an object reference against its own class type or any of its superclasses. This means that 
any object reference will evaluate to true if you use the instanceof operator against type Object, as 
follows: 

B b = new B(); 

if (b instanceof Object) { 

System.out.print("b is definitely an Object"); 

} 


This prints 

b is definitely an Object 



h 


Look for instanceof questions that test whether an object is an instance of an interface when 
the objects class implements the interface indirectly. An indirect implementation occurs when 
one of an objects superclasses implements an interface, but the actual class of the instance 
does not. In this example, 

interface Foo { } 

class A implements Foo { } 

class B extends A { } 

A a = new A(); 

B b = new B(); 

the following are true: 

a instanceof Foo 
b instanceof A 

b instanceof Foo // implemented indirectly 

An object is said to be of a particular interface type (meaning it will pass the instanceof test) 
if any of the objects superclasses implement the interface. 


In addition, it is legal to test whether the null reference is an instance of a class. This will always 
result in false, of course. This example, 

class InstanceTest { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

String a = null; 

boolean b = null instanceof String; 
boolean c = a instanceof String; 

System.out.printIn(b + " " + c); 

}} 

prints this: 

false false 


instanceof Compiler Error 

You cant use the instanceof operator to test across two different class hierarchies. For instance, the 
following will NOT compile: 




class Cat { } 
class Dog { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

Dog d = new Dog(); 

System.out.println(d instanceof Cat); 

} 

} 

Compilation failstheres no way d could ever refer to a Cat or a subtype of Cat. 



 a t c h 


Remember that arrays are objects, even if the array is an array of primitives. Watch for 
questions that look something like this: 

int [] nums = new int[3] ; 

if (nums instanceof Object) { } // result is true 

An array is always an instance of Object. Any array. 


Table 4-1 summarizes the use of the instanceof operator given the following: 


TABLE 4-1 


Operands and Results Using instanceof Operator 


First Operand 
(Reference Being Tested) 

instanceof Operand 
(Type We're Comparing the 
Reference Against) 

Result 

null 

Any class or interface type 

false 

Foo instance 

Foo, Bar, Face, Object 

true 

Bar instance 

Bar, Face, Obj ect 

true 

Bar instance 

Foo 

false 

Foo [ ] 

Foo, Bar, Face 

compiler error 

Foo [ ] 

Obj ect 

true 

Foo [ 1 ] 

Foo, Bar, Face, Obj ect 

true 


interface Face { } 

class Bar implements Face{ } 

class Foo extends Bar { } 


Arithmetic Operators 















Were sure youre familiar with the basic arithmetic operators: 

 + addition 

- subtraction 

 * multiplication 

 / division 

These can be used in the standard way: 

int x = 5 * 3; 
int y = x - 4; 

System.out.println("x - 4 is " + y); // Prints 11 

The Remainder (%) Operator (a.k.a. the Modulus Operator) 

One operator you might not be as familiar with is the remainder operator: %. The remainder operator 
divides the left operand by the right operand, and the result is the remainder, as the following code 
demonstrates: 

class MathTest { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
int x = 15; 
int y = x % 4; 

System.out.println("The result of 15 % 4 is the " 

+ "remainder of 15 divided by 4. The remainder is " + y); 

} 

} 

Running class MathTest prints the following: 

The result of 15 % 4 is the remainder of 15 divided by 4. The remainder is 3 

(Remember: Expressions are evaluated from left to right by default. You can change this sequence, or 
precedence, by adding parentheses. Also remember that the *, /, and % operators have a higher 
precedence than the + and - operators.) 



atch 


When working with ints, the remainder operator (a.k.a. the modulus operator) and the 
division operator relate to each other in an interesting way: 

m The modulus operator throws out everything but the remainder. 

 The division operator throws out the remainder. 


String Concatenation Operator 




The plus sign can also be used to concatenate two strings together, as we saw earlier (and as well 
definitely see again): 

String animal = "Gray " + "elephant"; 

String concatenation gets interesting when you combine numbers with strings. Check out the 
following: 

String a = "String"; 
int b = 3; 
int c = 7; 

System.out.println(a + b + c) ; 

Will the + operator act as a plus sign when adding the int variables b and c? Or will the + operator 
treat 3 and 7 as characters and concatenate them individually? Will the result be stringio or String37? 
Okay, youve had long enough to think about it. 

The int values were simply treated as characters and glued on to the right side of the String, giving 
the result: 

String37 

So we could read the previous code as 

Start with the value String, and concatenate the character 3 (the value of b) to it, to produce a new 
string String3, and then concatenate the character 7 (the value of c) to that, to produce a new string 
String37. Then print it out. 

However, if you put parentheses around the two int variables, as follows, 

System.out.println(a + (b + c)); 

youll get this: 

StringlG 

Using parentheses causes the (b + c) to evaluate first, so the rightmost + operator functions as the 
addition operator, given that both operands are int values. The key point here is that within the 
parentheses, the left-hand operand is not a St ring. If it were, then the + operator would perform string 
concatenation. The previous code can be read as 

Add the values of b and c together, and then take the sum and convert it to a string and concatenate it with the string from 
variable a. 

The rule to remember is this: 

If either operand is a string, the + operator becomes a string concatenation operator. If both operands are numbers, the + 
operator is the addition operator. 

Youll find that sometimes you might have trouble deciding whether, say, the left-hand operator is a 
String or not. On the exam, dont expect it always to be obvious. (Actually, now that we think about it, 
dont expect it ever to be obvious.) Look at the following code: 

System.out.println(x.foo() + 7); 

You cant know how the + operator is being used until you find out what the f oo () method returns! If 
foo() returns a String, then 7 is concatenated to the returned String. But if foo() returns a number, 


then the + operator is used to add 7 to the return value of f oo (). 

Finally, you need to know that its legal to mush together the compound additive operator (+=) and 
Strings, like so: 

String s = "123"; 
s += "45"; 

S +  6 7 ; 

System.out.printIn(s); 

Since both times the += operator was used and the left operand was a String, both operations were 
concatenations, resulting in 

1234567 



 a t c h 


If you dont understand how String concatenation works, especially within a print statement, 
you could actually fail the exam even if you know the rest of the answers to the questions! 
Because so many questions ask "What is the result? ", you need to know not only the result of 
the code running but also how that result is printed. Although at least a few questions will 
directly test your String knowledge, String concatenation shows up in other questions on 
virtually every objective. Experiment! For example, you might see a line such as this: 

int b = 2; 

System. out. print In ( " 11 + b + 3); 

It prints this: 

23 

But if the print statement changes to this: 

System.out.println(b + 3); 

The printed result becomes 

5 


Increment and Decrement Operators 

Java has two operators that will increment or decrement a variable by exacdy one. These operators are 
either two plus signs (++) or two minus signs ( - - 

 ++ Increment (prefix and postfix) 

I  Decrement (prefix and postfix) 




The operator is placed either before (prefix) or after (postfix) a variable to change its value. Whether 
the operator comes before or after the operand can change the outcome of an expression. Examine the 
following: 

1. class MathTest { 

2. static int players = 0; 

3. public static void main (String [] args) { 

4. System.out.println("players online: " + players++); 

5. System.out.println("The value of players is " 

+ players); 

6. System.out.println("The value of players is now " 

+ ++players); 

7 . } 

8 . } 

Notice that in the fourth line of the program the increment operator is after the variable players. That 
means were using the postfix increment operator, which causes players to be incremented by one but 
only after the value of players is used in the expression. When we run this program, it outputs the 
following: 

%java MathTest 
players online: 0 
The value of players is 1 
The value of players is now 2 

Notice that when the variable is written to the screen, at first it says the value is 0. Because we used the 
postfix increment operator, the increment doesnt happen until after the players variable is used in the 
print statement. Get it? The post in postfix means after. Line 5 doesnt increment players; it just 
outputs its value to the screen, so the newly incremented value displayed is 1. Line 6 applies the prefix 
increment operator to players, which means the increment happens before the value of the variable is 
used, so the output is 2. 

Expect to see questions mixing the increment and decrement operators with other operators, as in the 
following example: 

int x = 2; int y = 3; 

if ((y == x++) | (x < ++y)) { 

System.out.println("x = " + x + " y = " + y); 

} 

The preceding code prints this: 
x = 3 y = 4 

You can read the code as follows: If 3 is equal to 2 OR 3 < 4 

The first expression compares x and y, and the result is false, because the increment on x doesnt 
happen until after the == test is made. Next, we increment x, so now x is 3. Then we check to see if x is 
less than y , but we increment y before comparing it with x! So the second logical test is (3 < 4). The 
result is true, so the print statement runs. 

As with string concatenation, the increment and decrement operators are used throughout the exam, 
even on questions that arent trying to test your knowledge of how those operators work. You might see 
them in questions on for loops, exceptions, or even threads. Be ready. 



O Aten 


Look out for questions that use the increment or decrement operators on a final variable. 
Because final variables cant be changed, the increment and decrement operators cant be used 
with them, and any attempt to do so will result in a compiler error. The following code wont 
compile: 

final int x = 5; 
int y = x++; 

It produces this error: 

Test.java:4: cannot assign a value to final variable x 
int y = x++; 

A 

You can expect a violation like this to be buried deep in a complex piece of code. If you spot it, 
you know the code wont compile, and you can move on without working through the rest of 
the code. 

This question might seem to be testing you on some complex arithmetic operator trivia, 
when, in fact, its testing you on your knowledge of the final modifier. 


Conditional Operator 

The conditional operator is a ternary operator (it has three operands) and is used to evaluate boolean 
expressionsmuch like an if statement, except instead of executing a block of code if the test is t r ue, a 
conditional operator will assign a value to a variable. In other words, the goal of the conditional operator 
is to decide which of two values to assign to a variable. This operator is constructed using a ? (question 
mark) and a : (colon). The parentheses are optional. Here is its structure: 

x = (boolean expression) ? value to assign if true : value to assign if false 
Lets take a look at a conditional operator in code: 

class Salary { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int numOfPets = 3; 

String status = (numOfPets<4) ? "Pet limit not exceeded" 

: "too many pets"; 

System.out.println("This pet status is " + status); 

} 

} 

You can read the preceding code as Set numOfPets equal to 3. 

Next were going to assign a string to the status variable. If numOfPets is less than 4, assign "Pet 
limit not exceeded" to the status variable; otherwise, assign "too many pets" to the status 
variable. 




A conditional operator starts with a boolean operation, followed by two possible values for the 
variable to the left of the assignment (=) operator. The first value (the one to the left of the colon) is 
assigned if the conditional (boolean) test is true, and the second value is assigned if the conditional test 
is false. You can even nest conditional operators into one statement: 

class AssignmentOps { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
int sizeOfYard = 10; 
int numOfPets = 3; 

String status = (numOfPets<4)? n Pet count OK 

:(sizeOfYard >8)? "Pet limit on the edge" 

:"too many pets"; 

System.out.printIn("Pet status is " + status); 

} 

} 

Dont expect many questions using conditional operators, but you might get one. 


Logical Operators 

The exam objectives specify six logical operators (&, |, A , !, &&, and | |). Some Oracle documentation 
uses other terminology for these operators, but for our purposes and in the exam objectives, these six are 
the logical operators. 

Bitwise Operators (Not an Exam Topic!) 

Okay, this is going to be confusing. Of the six logical operators just listed, three of them (&, |, and A ) can 
also be used as bitwise operators. Bitwise operators were included in previous versions of the exam, 
but theyre NOT on the Java 6, Java 7, or Java 8 exam. We bring them up here just so you have a more 
complete picture of the logical operators. 

Here are several legal statements that use bitwise operators: 

byte bl = 6 & 8; 
byte b2 = 7 | 9; 

byte b3 = 5 ^ 4; 

System.out.printIn(bl + " " + b2 + " " + b3); 

Bitwise operators compare two variables bit by bit and return a variable whose bits have been set 
based on whether the two variables being compared had respective bits that were either both on (&), 
one or the other on (|), or exacdy one on ( A ). By the way, when we run the preceding code, we get 

0 15 l 



 a t c h 


Having said all this about bitwise operators, the key thing to remember 
BITWISE OPERATORS ARE NOT ON THE Java 6, Java 7, or Java 8 EXAM! 





Short-Circuit Logical Operators 


Five logical operators on the exam are used to evaluate statements that contain more than one boolean 
expression. The most commonly used of the five are the two short-circuit logical operators: 

 && Short-circuit AND 

 | | Short-circuit OR 

They are used to linklitde boolean expressions together to form bigger boolean expressions. The && 
and | | operators evaluate only boolean values. For an AND (&&) expression to be true, both operands 
must be true. For example: 

if ((2 < 3) && (3 < 4)) {} 

The preceding expression evaluates to true because both operand one (2 < 3) and operand two (3 < 

4) evaluate to true. 

The short-circuit feature of the && operator is so named because it doesnt waste its time on 
pointless evaluations. A short-circuit && evaluates the left side of the operation first (operand one), and if 
it resolves to false, the && operator doesnt bother looking at the right side of the expression (operand 
two) since the && operator already knows that the complete expression cant possibly be true. 

class Logical { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
boolean bl = false, b2 = false; 

boolean b3 = (bl == true) && (b2 = true); // will b2 be set to true? 

System.out.println(b3 + " " + b2); 

} 

} 

When we run the preceding code, the assignment ( b2 = true) never runs because of the short-circuit 
operator, so the output is 

%java Logical 

false false 

The | | operator is similar to the && operator, except that it evaluates to t rue if EITHER of the 
operands is true. If the first operand in an OR operation is t rue, the result will be t rue, so the short- 
circuit | | doesnt waste time looking at the right side of the equation. If the first operand is false, 
however, the short-circuit | | has to evaluate the second operand to see if the result of the OR operation 
will be true or false. Pay close attention to the following example; youll see quite a few questions like 
this on the exam: 





1. 

class TestOR { 

2 . 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

3 . 


if ((isItSmall(3) ) | (isItSmall(7))) { 

4 . 


System.out.println("Result is true"); 

5 . 


} 

6 . 


if ((isItSmall(6)) || (isItSmall(9))) { 

7 . 


System.out.println("Result is true"); 

8 . 


} 

9 . 

} 


10 . 



11 . 

public static boolean isItSmall(int i) { 

12 . 


if (i < 5) { 

13 . 


System.out.println("i < 5"); 

14 . 


return true; 

15 . 


} else { 

16 . 


System.out.println("i >= 5"); 

17 . 


return false; 

18 . 


} 

19 . 

} 


20 . 

} 



What is the result? 

% java TestOR 
i < 5 

Result is true 
i >= 5 
i >= 5 

Heres what happened when the main () method ran: 

1. When we hit line 3, the first operand in the | | expression (in other words, the left side of the 
| | operation) is evaluated. 

2. The isltSmall(3) method is invoked, prints "i < 5", and returns true. 

3. Because the first operand in the | | expression on line 3 is true, the | | operator doesnt 
bother evaluating the second operand. So we never see the "i >= 5" that would have printed had 
the second operand been evaluated (which would have invoked is I tsmall (7)). 

4. Line 6 is evaluated, beginning with the first operand in the | | expression. 

5. The isltSmall(6) method is called, prints "i >= 5", and returns false. 

6. Because the first operand in the | | expression on line 6 is false, the | | operator cant skip 
the second operand; theres still a chance the expression can be t rue, if the second operand 
evaluates to true. 

7. The isltSmall(9) method is invoked and prints "i >= 5". 

8. The isltSmall(9) method returns false, so the expression on line 6 is false, and thus line 
7 never executes. 





The || and && operators work only with boolean operands. The exam may try to fool you by 
using integers with these operators: 

if (5 && 6) { } 

It looks as though were trying to do a bitwise AND on the bits representing the integers 5 and 
6, but the code wont even compile. 


Logical Operators (not Short-Circuit) 

There are two non-short-circuit logical operators: 

 & Non-short-circuit AND 

 | Non-short-circuit OR 

These operators are used in logical expressions just like the && and | | operators are used, but because 
they arent the short-circuit operators, they evaluate both sides of the expressionalways! Theyre 
inefficient. For example, even if the first operand (left side) in an & expression is false, the second 
operand will still be evaluatedeven though its now impossible for the result to be t rue! And the | is 
just as inefficient: if the first operand is true, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) still plows ahead and 
evaluates the second operand even when it knows the expression will be t rue regardless. 

Youll find a lot of questions on the exam that use both the short-circuit and non-short-circuit logical 
operators. Youll have to know exacdy which operands are evaluated and which are not, because the 
result will vary depending on whether the second operand in the expression is evaluated. Consider this, 

int Z = 5; 

if(++z > 5 || ++z > 6) z + +; // z = 7 after this code 

versus this: 

int z = 5; 

if(++z > 5 | + + z > 6) z + +; // z = 8 after this code 

Logical Operators A and ! 

The last two logical operators on the exam are 

A Exclusive-OR (XOR) 

 ! Boolean invert 

The A (exclusive-OR) operator evaluates only boolean values. The A operator is related to the non 
short-circuit operators we just reviewed, in that it always evaluates both the left and right operands in an 
expression. For an exclusive-OR ( A ) expression to be true, EXACTLY one operand must be true. This 
example, 

System.out.println("xor " + ((2 < 3) A (4 > 3))); 


produces this output: 






xor false 


The preceding expression evaluates to false because BOTH operand one (2 < 3) and operand two 
(4 > 3) evaluate to true. 

The ! (boolean invert) operator returns the opposite of a booleans current value. The following 
statement, 


if(!(7 == 5)) { System.out.println("not equal"); } 

can be read If its not true that 7 == 5, and the statement produces this output: 
not equal 

Heres another example using booleans: 

boolean t = true; 
boolean f = false; 

System.out.println("! M + (t & If) + " " + f); 

It produces this output: 

! true false 

In the preceding example, notice that the & test succeeded (printing true) and that the value of the 
boolean variable f did not change, so it printed false. 


Operator Precedence 

The OCA 8 exam has reintroduced the topic of operator precedence. As you probably already know but 
will definitely see demonstrated in this section, when several operators are used in combination, the 
order in which they are evaluated can alter the result of the expression. 

Operator Precedence Rant 

Allow us to rant for a minute here. Memorizing operator precedence was on the old SCJP 1.2 exam about 
15 years ago. Starting with the SCJP 1.4 exam, and for all the exams until the OCA 8, operator precedence 
has not been on the exam. For a glorious 15 years, candidates didnt have to do this bit of memorization. 
Sadly, this topic snuck its way back into the exam for OCA 8. Why do we care so much about this? Take a 
look at this code: 

System.out.println(true & false == false | true); 

What result would you expect? Imagine a more realistic version, evaluating some booleans: 

System.out.println(bl & b2 == b3 | b4); 

What would you guess the programmers intention was here? There are two likely scenarios: 

Scenario 1: (bl & b2) == (b3 | b4) If this was the programmers intention, then he just created a 
bug. 


Scenario 2: bl & (b2 == b3) | b4 If this was the programmers intention, then the code will work 
as intended, but his boss and fellow workers will want to strangle him. 

This is a long-winded way to say that when youre writing code, you shouldnt rely on everyones 
memory of operator precedence. You should just use parentheses like civilized people do. 


The Actual Beginning of the Operator Precedence Section 

Table 4-2 lists the most commonly used operators and their relative precedence, starting at the top with 
the highest precedence operators and ending at the bottom with the lowest. (Note, not all of Javas 
operators are in this table!) 


TABLE 4-2 


Precedence Hierarchy of Common Operators (from Highest to Lowest) 


Types of Operators 

Symbols 

Example Uses 

Unary operators 

! t ++>  

-7 * 4, ImyBoolean 

Multiplication, division, modulus 

* / % 

) / y o 

7 % 4 

Addition, subtraction 

+ >  

7 + 4 

Relational operators 

<, >, <=, >= 

y > x 

Equality operators 

  y !  

y ! = x 

Logical operators (& beats |) 

Sc, | 

myBool Sc yourBool 

Short-circuit (&& beats | |) 

ScSc, | | 

myBool | yourBool 

Assignment operators 

= , +=,  = 

X += 5; 


JavaRanch (we know, we know, Coderanch) moderator Fritz Walraven shared this tip with us. We 
like it, and were passing it along to you: for the table above, you might make up a word like 
UMARELSA, or a sentence using those first letters, to help you remember the precedence rules! 

There are three important general rules for determining how Java will evaluate expressions with 
operators: 

i When two operators of the same precedence are in the same expression, Java evaluates the 
expression from left to right. 

i When parts of an expression are placed in parentheses, those parts are evaluated first. 

i When parentheses are nested, the innermost parentheses are evaluated first. 

A good way to burn these precedence rules into your brain is toas alwayswrite some test code 
and play around with it. Weve added an example of some test code that demonstrates several of the 
precedence hierarchy rules listed here. As you can see, we often compared parentheses-free expressions 
with their parentheses-rich counterparts to prove the rules: 















System.out.printIn((-7 - 4) + "  + (-(7 - 4) ) ) ; // unary (-7), beats minus 

// output: -11 -3 

System.out.println((2 +3*4) + " " + ((2+3) * 4)); // * beats + 

// output: 14 20 

System.out.println(7 > 5 && 2 > 3); //> beats && 

// output: false 

System.out.print((true & false == false | true) + " "); // == beats & System.out. 

print(((true & false) == (false | true))); // output: true 

And to repeat, the output is: 

-11 -3 
14 20 
false 

true false 

Were so sorry that you need to memorize this stuff, but if you master whats in this short section, you 
should be able to handle whatever weird precedence-related questions the exam throws at you. 


CERTIFICATION SUMMARY 

If youve studied this chapter diligendy, you should have a firm grasp on Java operators, and you should 
understand what equality means when tested with the == operator. Lets review the highlights of what 
youve learned in this chapter. 

The logical operators (&&, | |, &, |, and A ) can be used only to evaluate two boolean expressions. The 
difference between && and & is that the && operator wont bother testing the right operand if the left 
evaluates to false, because the result of the && expression can never be true. The difference between | | 
and | is that the | | operator wont bother testing the right operand if the left evaluates to t rue because the 
result is already known to be true at that point. 

The == operator can be used to compare values of primitives, but it can also be used to determine 
whether two reference variables refer to the same object. 

The instanceof operator is used to determine whether the object referred to by a reference variable 
passes the IS-Atest for a specified type. 

The + operator is overloaded to perform string concatenation tasks and can also concatenate 
strings and primitives, but be carefulconcatenation can be tricky. 

The conditional operator (a.k.a. the ternary operator) has an unusual, three-operand syntaxdont 
mistake it for a complex assert statement. 

The ++ and - - operators will be used throughout the exam, and you must pay attention to whether they 
are prefixed or postfixed to the variable being updated. 

Even though you should use parentheses in real life, for the exam you should memorize Table 4-2 so 
you can determine how code that doesnt use parentheses for complex expressions will be evaluated, 
based on Javas operator-precedence hierarchy. 

Be prepared for a lot of exam questions involving the topics from this chapter. Even within questions 
testing your knowledge of another objective, the code will frequendy use operators, assignments, object 
and primitive passing, and so on. 



/ TWO-MINUTE DRILL 


Here are some of the key points from each section in this chapter. 

Relational Operators (OCA Objectives 3.1 and 3.2) 

? Relational operators always result in a boolean value (true or false). 

? There are six relational operators: >, >=, <, <=, ==, and ! =. The last two (== and ! =) are 
sometimes referred to as equality operators. 

? When comparing characters, Java uses the Unicode value of the character as the numerical 
value. 

? Equality operators 

? There are two equality operators: == and ! =. 

? Four types of things can be tested: numbers, characters, booleans, and reference 
variables. 

? When comparing reference variables, == returns true only if both references refer to the 
same object. 

instanceof Operator (OCA Objective 3.1) 

? instanceofisfor reference variables only; it checks whether the object is of a particular 
type. 

? The instanceof operator can be used only to test objects (or null) against class types that 
are in the same class hierarchy. 

? For interfaces, an object passes the instanceof test if any of its superclasses implement the 
interface on the right side of the instanceof operator. 

Arithmetic Operators (OCA Objective 3.1) 

? The four primary math operators are add (+), subtract (-), multiply (*), and divide (/). 

? The remainder (a.k.a. modulus) operator (%) returns the remainder of a division. 

? Expressions are evaluated from left to right, unless you add parentheses, or unless some 
operators in the expression have higher precedence than others. 

? The *, /, and % operators have higher precedence than + and -. 

String Concatenation Operator (OCA Objective 3.1) 

? If either operand is a String, the + operator concatenates the operands. 

? If both operands are numeric, the + operator adds the operands. 

Increment/Decrement Operators (OCA Objective 3.1) 

? Prefix operators (e.g. - -x) run before the value is used in the expression. 


? Postfix operators (e.g., x++) run after the value is used in the expression. 

? In any expression, both operands are fully evaluated before the operator is applied. 

? Variables marked final cannot be incremented or decremented. 

Ternary (Conditional) Operator (OCA Objective 3.3) 

? Returns one of two values based on the state of its boolean expression. 

? Returns the value after the ? if the expression is true. 

? Returns the value after the : if the expression is false. 

Logical Operators (OCA Objective 3.1) 

? The exam covers six logical operators: &, |, A , !, &&, and | |. 

? Work with two expressions (except for !) that must resolve to boolean values. 

? The && and & operators return true only if both operands are t r u e. 

? The | | and | operators return true if either or both operands are true. 

? The && and | | operators are known as short-circuit operators. 

? The && operator does not evaluate the right operand if the left operand is false. 

? The | | does not evaluate the right operand if the left operand is true. 

? The & and | operators always evaluate both operands. 

? The A operator (called the logical XOR) returns true if exacdy one operand is true. 

? The ! operator (called the inversion operator) returns the opposite value of the boolean 
operand it precedes. 

Parentheses and Operator Precedence (OCA Objective 3.1) 

? In real life, use parentheses to clarify your code, and force Java to evaluate expressions as 
intended. 

? For the exam, memorize Table 4-2 to determine how parentheses-free code will be evaluated. 

SELF TEST 


1. Given: 

class Hexy { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
int i = 42; 

String s = (i<40)?"life":(i>50)?"universe":"everything"; 
System.out.printIn(s); 


} 

What is the result? 
A. null 


B. life 

C. universe 

D. everything 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 

2. Given: 

public class Dog { 

String name; 

Dog(String s) { name = s; } 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Dog dl = new Dog("Boi"); 

Dog d2 = new Dog("Tyri"); 

System, out. print ( (dl == d2) + " 11 ) ; 

Dog d3 = new Dog("Boi"); 
d2 = dl; 

System.out.print((dl == d2) + M ") ; 

System.out.print((dl == d3) + " "); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. true true true 

B. true true false 

C. false true false 

D. false true true 

E. false false false 

F. An exception will be thrown at runtime 

3. Given: 

class Fork { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

if(args.length == 1 | args [1] .equals("test")) { 
System.out.println("test case"); 

} else { 

System.out.println("production " + args [0]); 

} 

} 

} 

And the command-line invocation: 
java Fork live2 

What is the result? 

A. test case 


B. production live2 

C. test case live2 

D. Compilation fails 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 

4. Given: 

class Feline { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
long x = 42L; 
long y = 44L; 

System.out.print(" " + 7 + 2 + " ; 

System.out.print(foo() + x + 5 + " "); 

System.out.printIn(x + y + foo()); 

} 

static String foo() { return "foo"; } 

} 

What is the result? 

A. 9 foo47 86foo 

B. 9 f0047 4244f00 

C. 9 f00425 86f00 

D. 9 f00425 4244f00 

E. 72 f0047 86f00 

F. 72 f0047 4244f00 

G. 72 f00425 86f00 

H. 72 f00425 4244f00 

I. Compilation fails 

5. Note: Heres another old-style drag-and-drop question...justincase. 

Place the fragments into the code to produce the output 33. Note that you must use each fragment 
exacdy once. 

CODE: 

class Incr { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Integer x = 7; 
int y = 2; 

x 


System.out.printIn(x); 

} 


} 













FRAGMENTS: 


y y y y 

y x x 


6. Given: 

public class Cowboys { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
int x = 12; 

int a = 5; 

int b = 7; 

System.out.println(x/a + " " + x/b); 

} 

} 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. 2 l 

B. 2 2 

C. 3 l 

D. 3 2 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 

7. Given: 

3. public class McGee { 

4. public static void main(String[] args) { 

5. Days dl = Days.TH; 

6. Days d2 = Days.M; 

7. for(Days d: Days.values()) { 

8. if(d.equals(Days.F)) break; 

9. d2 = d; 

10 . } 

11. System.out.println((dl == d2)?"same old" : "newly new"); 

12 . } 

13. enum Days {M, T, W, TH, F, SA, SU}; 

14. } 

What is the result? 

A. same old 

B. newly new 

C. Compilation fails due to multiple errors 

D. Compilation fails due only to an error on line 7 

E. Compilation fails due only to an error on line 8 

F. Compilation fails due only to an error on line 11 


G. Compilation fails due only to an error on line 13 
8. Given: 


4 . 

public class SpecialOps { 



5 . 

public static void main(String[] 

args 

) { 

6 . 

String s = ""; 



7. 

boolean bl = true; 



8 . 

boolean b2 = false; 



9 . 

if ( (b2 = false) | (21%5) > 2) 

s + = 

"x" ; 

10 . 

if(bl || (b2 = true)) 

s + = 

"y" ; 

11. 

if(b2 == true) 

s + = 

" Z " ; 

12 . 

System.out.println(s); 



13 . 

} 



14 . 

} 




Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Compilation fails 

B. x will be included in the output 

C. y will be included in the output 

D. z will be included in the output 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 

9. Given: 

3. public class Spock { 

4. public static void main(String[] args) { 

5. int mask = 0; 

6. int count = 0; 

7. if ( ( (5<7) | | ( + + count < 10)) | mask++ < 10 ) mask = mask + 1; 

8. if( (6 > 8) false) mask = mask + 10; 

9. if( !(mask > 1) && ++count > 1) mask = mask + 100; 

10. System.out.println(mask + " " + count); 

11. } 

12 . } 

Which two are true about the value of mask and the value of count at line 10? (Choose two.) 

A. mask is 0 

B. mask is 1 

C. mask is 2 

D. mask is 10 

E. mask is greater than 10 

F. count is 0 

G. count is greater than 0 


10. Given: 


3. interface Vessel { } 

4. interface Toy { } 

5. class Boat implements Vessel { } 

6. class Speedboat extends Boat implements Toy { } 

7. public class Tree { 

8. public static void main(String[] args) { 

9. String s = "0"; 

10. Boat b = new Boat(); 

11. Boat b2 = new SpeedboatO; 

12. Speedboat s2 = new SpeedboatO; 

13. if((b instanceof Vessel) && (b2 instanceof Toy)) s += "l"; 

14. if((s2 instanceof Vessel) && (s2 instanceof Toy)) s += "2"; 

15. System.out.println(s); 

16. } 

17. } 

What is the result? 

A. 0 

B. 01 

C. 02 

D. 012 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 

11. Given: 

10. boolean bl = false; 

11. boolean b2; 

12. int x = 2, y = 5; 

13. bl = 2-12/4 > 5+-7 && bl != y++>5 == 7%4 > ++x | bl == true; 

14. b2 = (2-12/4 > 5+-7) && (bl != y++>5) == (7%4 > ++x) | (bl == true) 

15. System.out.println(bl + " " + b2); 

What is the result? (This is a tricky one. If you want a hint, go take another look at the operator 
precedence rant in the chapter.) 

A. true true 

B. false true 

C. true false 

D. false false 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 

SELF TEST ANSWERS 

1. 0 D is correct. This is a ternary nested in a ternary. Both ternary expressions are false. 

A, B, C, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.1 and 3.3) 


2. 0 C is correct. The == operator tests for reference variable equality, not object equality. 

S3 A, B, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 3.1 and 3.2) 

3. 0 E is correct. Because the short-circuit (| |) is not used, both operands are evaluated. Since 
args[l] is past the args array bounds, an ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException is thrown. 

3 A, B, C, and D are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 3.1 and 3.2) 

4. 0 G is correct. Concatenation runs from left to right, and if either operand isastring, the 
operands are concatenated. If both operands are numbers, they are added together. 

3 A, B, C, D, E, F, H, and I are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.1) 

5. Answer: 

class Incr { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Integer x = 7; 
int y = 2; 

x * = x ; 

y *= y; 
y *= y; 

X -= y; 

System.out.printIn (x) ; 

} 

} 

Yeah, we know its kind of puzzle-y, but you might encounter something like it on the real exam 
if Oracle reinstates this type of question. (OCA Objective 3.1) 

6. 0 A is correct. When dividing ints, remainders are always rounded down. 

3 B, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.1) 

7. 0 A is correct. All this syntax is correct. The for-each iterates through the enum using the 
values () method to return an array. An enum can be compared using either equals () or ==. An 
enum can be used in a ternary operators boolean test. 

3 B, C, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3) 

8. 0 C is correct. Line 9 uses the modulus operator, which returns the remainder of the division, 
which in this case is l. Also, line 9 sets b2 to false, and it doesnt test b2s value. Line 10 would 
set b2 to true; however, the short-circuit operator keeps the expression b2 = true from being 
executed. 

3 A, B, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 3.1, and 3.2) 

9. 0 C and F are correct. At line 7 the | | keeps count from being incremented, but the | allows 
mask to be incremented. At line 8 the A returns true only if exacdy one operand is true. At line 9 
mask is 2 and the && keeps count from being incremented. 

3 A, B, D, E, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.1) 

10. 0 D is correct. First, remember that instanceof can look up through multiple levels of an 
inheritance tree. Also remember that instanceof is commonly used before attempting a downcast; 
so in this case, after line 15, it would be possible to say Speedboat s3 = ( Speedboat ) b2 ; . 

S3 A, B, C, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.1) 


11. 0 A is correct. Were pretty sure you wont encounter anything as horrible as this on the real 
exam. But if you got this one correct, pat yourself on the back! The way to tackle a problem like this 
is to evaluate the expression in stages. In this case you might solve it like so: 

Stage 1: resolve any use of unary operators 

Stage 2: resolve any use of multiplication-related operators 

Stage 3: handle addition and subtraction 

Stage 4: handle any relationship operators 

Stage 5: deal with the equality operators 

Stage 6: deal with the logical operators 

Stage 7: do the short-circuit operators 

Stage 8: finally, do the assignment operators 

0 B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.1) 




5 

Flow Control and Exceptions 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES 


 Use if and switch Statements 

 Develop for, do, and while Loops 

 Use break and continue Statements 

 Use try, catch, and finally Statements 

 State the Effects of Exceptions 

 Recognize Common Exceptions 

/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 


C an you imagine trying to write code using a language that didnt give you a way to execute 
statements conditionally? Flow control is a key part of most any useful programming 
language, and Java offers several ways to accomplish it. Some statements, such as if 
statements and for loops, are common to most languages. But Java also throws in a couple of 
flow control features you might not have used beforeexceptions and assertions. (Well discuss 
assertions in the next chapter.) 

The if statement and the switch statement are types of conditional/decision controls that allow your program to behave 
differently at a fork in the road, depending on the result of a logical test. Java also provides three different looping constructs 
for, while, and do so you can execute the same code over and over again depending on some condition being true. 
Exceptions give you a clean, simple way to organize code that deals with problems that might crop up at runtime. 

With these tools, you can build a robust program that can handle any logical situation with grace. Expect to see a wide range 
of questions on the exam that include flow control as part of the question code, even on questions that arent testing your 
knowledge of flow control. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Using if and switch Statements (OCA Objectives 3.3 and 
3.4) 

3.3 Create if and if-else and ternary constructs. 

3.5 Use a switch statement. 


The if and switch statements are commonly referred to as decision statements. When you use 





decision statements in your program, youre asking the program to evaluate a given expression to 
determine which course of action to take. Well look at the if statement first. 


if-else Branching 

The basic format of an if statement is as follows: 

if (booleanExpression) { 

System.out.println("Inside if statement"); 

} 

The expression in parentheses must evaluate to (a boolean) true or false. Typically, youre testing 
something to see if its true and then running a code block (one or more statements) if it is true and 
(optionally) another block of code if it isnt. The following code demonstrates a legal if-else statement: 

if (x > 3) { 

System.out.println("x is greater than 3"); 

} else { 

System.out.println("x is not greater than 3"); 

} 

The else block is optional, so you can also use the following: 

if (x > 3) { 

y = 2; 

} 

Z += 8 ; 

a = y + x; 

The preceding code will assign 2 to y if the test succeeds (meaning x really is greater than 3), but the 
other two lines will execute regardless. Even the curly braces are optional if you have only one statement 
to execute within the body of the conditional block. The following code example is legal (although not 
recommended for readability): 

if (x > 3) // bad practice, but seen on the exam 

y = 2; 

Z += 8 ; 

a = y + X; 

Most developers consider it good practice to enclose blocks within curly braces, even if theres only 
one statement in the block. Be careful with code like the preceding, because you might think it should read 
as 


If x is greater than 3, then set y to 2, z to z + 8, and a to y + x. 

But the last two lines are going to execute no matter what! They arent part of the conditional flow. You 
might find it even more misleading if the code were indented as follows: 

if (x > 3) 
y = 2; 

Z += 8; 

a = y + x; 


You might have a need to nest if-else statements (although, again, its not recommended for readability, 
so nested if tests should be kept to a minimum). You can set up an if - else statement to test for multiple 
conditions. The following example uses two conditions, so if the first test fails, we want to perform a 
second test before deciding what to do: 

if (price < 300) { 

buyProduct(); 

} else { 

if (price < 400) { 

getApproval(); 

} 

else { 

dontBuyProduct(); 

} 

} 

This brings up the other if-else construct, the if, else if, else. The preceding code could (and 
should) be rewritten like this: 

if (price < 300) { 

buyProduct(); 

} else if (price < 400) { 

getApproval(); 

} else { 

dontBuyProduct(); 

} 

There are a couple of rules for using else and else if: 

 You can have zero or one else for a given if, and it must come after any else ifs. 

 You can have zero to many else if s for a given if, and they must come before the (optional) 
else. 

 Once an else if succeeds, none of the remaining else if s nor the else will be tested. 

The following example shows code that is horribly formatted for the real world. As youve probably 
guessed, its fairly likely that youll encounter formatting like this on the exam. In any case, the code 
demonstrates the use of multiple else if s: 

int X = 1; 

if ( x == 3 ) { } 

else if (x < 4) {System.out.printIn("<4"); } 
else if (x < 2) {System.out.printIn("<2"); } 
else { System.out.println("else"); } 

It produces this output: 

<4 


(Notice that even though the second else if is true, it is never reached.) 

Sometimes you can have a problem figuring out which if your else should pair with, as follows: 


if (exam.done()) 

if (exam.getScore() < 0.61) 

System.out.println("Try again."); 

// Which if does this belong to? 

else System.out.println("Java master!"); 

We intentionally left out the indenting in this piece of code so it doesnt give clues as to which if 
statement the else belongs to. Did you figure it out? Java law decrees that an else clause belongs to the 
innermost if statement to which it might possibly belong (in other words, the closest preceding if that 
doesnt have an else). In the case of the preceding example, the else belongs to the second if statement 
in the listing. With proper indenting, it would look like this: 

if (exam.done()) 

if (exam.getScore() < 0.61) 

System.out.println("Try again."); 

// Which if does this belong to? 
else 

System.out.println("Java master!"); 

Following our coding conventions by using curly braces, it would be even easier 
to read: 

if (exam.done()) { 

if (exam.getScore() < 0.61) { 

System.out.println("Try again."); 

// Which if does this belong to? 

} else { 

System.out.println("Java master!"); 

} 

} 

Dont get your hopes up about the exam questions being all nice and indented properly. Some exam takers 
even have a slogan for the way questions are presented on the exam: Anything that can be made more 
confusing will be. 

Be prepared for questions that not only fail to indent nicely but also intentionally indent in a misleading 
way. Pay close attention for misdirection like the following: 

if (exam.done()) 

if (exam.getScore() < 0.61) 

System.out.println("Try again."); 

else 

System, out .println ( "Java master!"); // Hmmmmm... now where does 

// it belong? 

Of course, the preceding code is exacdy the same as the previous two examples, except for the way it 
looks. 

Legal Expressions for if Statements 

The expression in an if statement must be a boolean expression. Any expression that resolves to a 
boolean is fine, and some of the expressions can be complex. Assume doStuff () returns true, 


int y = 5; 
int x = 2; 

if ( ( (x > 3) Sc8c (y < 2)) | doStuffO) { 

System.out.printIn("true"); 

} 

which prints 
true 


You can read the preceding code as, If both (x > 3) and (y < 2) are true, or if the result of doStuff () 
is true, then print true. So, basically, if just doStuff () alone is true, well still get true. If 
doStuff () is false, though, then both (x > 3) and (y < 2) will have to be true in order to print true. 
The preceding code is even more complex if you leave off one set of parentheses as follows: 

int y = 5; 
int x = 2; 

if ( (x > 3) && (y < 2) | doStuffO) { 

System.out.printIn("true"); 

} 


This now prints.. .nothing! Because the preceding code (with one less set of parentheses) evaluates as 
though you were saying, If (x > 3) is true, and either (y < 2) or the result of doStuff () is true, then 
print true. So if (x > 3) is not true, no point in looking at the rest of the expression. Because of the 
short-circuit &&, the expression is evaluated as though there were parentheses around (y < 2) | 
dostuf f (). In other words, it is evaluated as a single expression before the && and a single expression 
after the &&. 

Remember that the only legal expression in an if test isaboolean.In some languages, 0 == false and 
1 == true. Not so in Java! The following code shows if statements that might look tempting but are 
illegal, followed by legal substitutions: 


int truelnt 
int falselnt 
if (truelnt) 
if (truelnt 
if (1) 

if (falselnt 
if (truelnt 
if (falselnt 


1 ; 

0 ; 

true) 

= false) 
1 ) 

= 0 ) 


// illegal 
// illegal 
// illegal 
// illegal 
// legal 
// legal 



 a t c h 


One common mistake programmers make (and that can be difficult to spot) is assigning a 
boolean variable when you meant to test a boolean variable. Look out for code like the 
following: 

boolean boo = false; 
if (boo = true) { } 


You might think one of three things: 





1. The code compiles and runs fine, and the if test fails because boo is false. 

2. The code wont compile because youre using an assignment (=) rather than an 
equality test (==). 

3. The code compiles and runs fine, and the if test succeeds because boo is SET to 
true (rather than TESTED for true) in the if argument! 

Well, number 3 is correct-pointless, but correct. Given that the result of any assignment is the 
value of the variable after the assignment, the expression (boo = true ) has a result of true. 
Hence, the if test succeeds. But the only variables that can be assigned (rather than tested 
against something else) are a boolean or a Boolean; all other assignments will result in 
something non-boolean, so theyre not legal, as in the following: 

int x = 3; 

if (x = 5) { } // Won't compile because x is not a boolean! 

Because if tests require boolean expressions, you need to be really solid on both logical 
operators and if test syntax and semantics. 


switch Statements 

Youve seen how if and else - if statements can be used to support both simple and complex decision 
logic. In many cases, the switch statement provides a cleaner way to handle complex decision logic. 
Lets compare the following if - else if statement to the equivalendy performing switch statement: 

int x = 3; 
if(x == 1) { 

System.out.println("x equals 1"); 

} 

else if(x == 2) { 

System.out.println("x equals 2"); 

} 

else { 

System.out.println("No idea what x is"); 

} 

Now lets see the same functionality represented in a switch construct: 

int x = 3; 
switch (x) { 

case 1: 

System.out.println("x equals 1"); 
break; 
case 2: 

System.out.println("x equals 2"); 
break; 
default: 

System.out.println("No idea what x is"); 

} 

Note: The reason this switch statement emulates the if is because of the break statements that were 





placed inside of the switch. In general, break statements are optional, and as you will see in a few 
pages, their inclusion or exclusion causes huge changes in how a switch statement will execute. 

Legal Expressions for switch and case 

The general form of the switch statement is 

switch (expression) { 

case constantl: code block 
case constant2: code block 
default: code block 

} 

A switchs expression must evaluate to a char, byte, short, int, an enum (as of Java 5), and a 
String (as of Java 7). That means if youre not using an enum or a String, only variables and values 
that can be automatically promoted (in other words, implicidy cast) to an int are acceptable. You wont 
be able to compile if you use anything else, including the remaining numeric types of long, float, and 
double. 

A case constant must evaluate to the same type that the switch expression can use, with one additional 
and bigconstraint: the case constant must be a compile-time constant! Since the case argument has to 
be resolved at compile time, you can use only a constant or final variable that is immediately initialized 
with a literal value. It is not enough to be final; it must be a compile-time constant. Heres an example: 

final int a = 1; 
final int b; 
b = 2; 
int x = 0; 
switch (x) { 

case a: // ok 

case b: // compiler error 

Also, the switch can only check for equality. This means the other relational operators such as greater 
than are rendered unusable in a case. The following is an example of a valid expression using a method 
invocation in a switch statement. Note that for this code to be legal, the method being invoked on the 
object reference must return a value compatible with an int. 

String s = "xyz"; 
switch (s.length()) { 

case 1: 

System.out.printIn( M length is one"); 
break; 
case 2: 

System.out.printIn("length is two"); 
break; 
case 3: 

System.out.printIn("length is three"); 
break; 
default: 

System.out.printIn("no match"); 

} 

One other rule you might not expect involves the question, What happens if I switch on a variable 
smaller than an int? Look at the following switch: 



byte g = 2; 
switch(g) { 

case 23: 
case 128: 

} 

This code wont compile. Although the switch argument is legala byte is implicidy cast to an int 
the second case argument (128) is too large for a byte, and the compiler knows it! Attempting to compile 
the preceding example gives you an error something like this: 

Test.java:6: possible loss of precision 
found : int 
required: byte 
case 128: 


Its also illegal to have more than one case label using the same value. For example, the following 
block of code wont compile because it uses two cases with the same value of 80: 

int temp = 90; 
switch(temp) { 

case 80 : System.out.println("80"); 

case 80 : System.out.println("80 M ); // won't compile! 

case 90 : System.out.println("90"); 
default : System.out.println("default"); 

} 

It is legal to leverage the power of boxing in a switch expression. For instance, the following is legal: 

switch(new Integer(4)) { 

case 4: System.out.println("boxing is OK"); 

} 



Jiatc h 


Look for any violation of the rules for switch and case arguments. For example, you might 
find illegal examples like the following snippets: 

switch(x) { 

case 0 { 
y = 7; 

} 

} 

switch(x) { 

0 : { } 

1 : { } 

} 

In the first example, the case omits the colon. The second example omits the keyword case. 





An Intro to String "equality 

As weve been discussing, the operation of switch statements depends on the expression matching or 
being equal to one of the cases. Weve talked about how we know when primitives are equal, but what 
does it mean for objects to be equal? This is another one of those surprisingly tricky topics, and for those 
of you who intend to take the OCP exam, youll spend a lot of time studying object equality. For you 
OCA candidates, all you have to know is that for a switch statement, two Strings will be considered 
equal if they have the same case-sensitive sequence of characters. For example, in the following partial 
switch statement, the expression would match the case: 

String s = "Monday"; 
switch(s) { 

case "Monday": // matches! 

But the following would NOT match: 

String s = "MONDAY"; 
switch(s) { 

case "Monday": // Strings are case-sensitive, DOES NOT match 


Break and Fall-Through in switch Blocks 

Were finally ready to discuss the break statement and offer more details about flow control within a 
switch statement. The most important thing to remember about the flow of execution through a switch 
statement is this: 

case constants are evaluated from the top down, and the first case constant that matches the switchs expression is the execution 
entry point. 

In other words, once a case constant is matched, the Java Virtual Machine (JVM) will execute the 
associated code block and ALL subsequent code blocks (barring a break statement), too! The following 
example uses aStringinacase statement: 

class Switchstring { 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

String s = "green"; 
switch(s) { 

case "red": System.out.print("red "); 
case "green": System.out.print("green "); 
case "blue": System.out.print("blue "); 
default: System.out.println("done"); 

} 

} 

} 

In this example case "green" : matched, so the JVM executed that code block and all subsequent code 
blocks to produce the output: 

green blue done 

Again, when the program encounters the keyword break during the execution of a switch statement, 
execution will immediately move out of the switch block to the next statement after the switch. If break 
is omitted, the program just keeps executing the remaining case blocks until either a break is found or the 


switch statement ends. Examine the following code: 

int x = 1; 
switch(x) { 

case 1: System.out.println("x is one"); 
case 2: System.out.println( M x is two"); 
case 3: System.out.println( M x is three); 

} 

System.out.println("out of the switch"); 

The code will print the following: 

x is one 
x is two 
x is three 
out of the switch 

This combination occurs because the code didnt hit a break statement; execution just kept dropping 
down through each case until the end. This dropping down is actually called fall-through, because of 
the way execution falls from one case to the next. Remember, the matching case is simply your entry 
point into the switch block! In other words, you must not think of it as, Find the matching case, execute 
just that code, and get out. Thats not how it works. If you do want that just the matching code 
behavior, youll insert a break into each case as follows: 

int X = 1; 
switch(x) { 

case 1: { 

System.out.println("x is one"); break; 

} 

case 2: { 

System.out.println("x is two"); break; 

} 

case 3: { 

System.out.println("x is two"); break; 

} 

} 

System.out.println("out of the switch"); 

Running the preceding code, now that weve added the break statements, prints: 

x is one 

out of the switch 

And thats it. We entered into the switch block at case l. Because it matched the switch () argument, 
we got the println statement and then hit the break and jumped to the end of the switch. 

An interesting example of this fall-through logic is shown in the following code: 



int x = someNumberBetweenOneAndTen; 
switch (x) { 

case 2: 
case 4: 
case 6: 
case 8: 
case 10: { 

System.out.println("x is an even number"); break; 

}} 

This switch statement will print x is an even number or nothing, depending on whether the number is 
between one and ten and is odd or even. For example, if x is 4, execution will begin at case 4, but then 
fall down through 6, 8, and 10, where it prints and then breaks. The break at case 10, by the way, is not 
needed; were already at the end of the switch anyway. 

Note: Because fall-through is less than intuitive, Oracle recommends that you add a comment such as 
// fall through when you use fall-through logic. 

The Default Case 

What if, using the preceding code, you wanted to print x is an odd number if none of the cases (the 
even numbers) matched? You couldnt put it after the switch statement, or even as the last case in the 
switch, because in both of those situations it would always print x is an odd number. To get this 
behavior, youd use the default keyword. (By the way, if youve wondered why there is a default 
keyword even though we dont use a modifier for default access control, now youll see that the default 
keyword is used for a completely different purpose.) The only change we need to make is to add the 
default case to the preceding code: 

int x = someNumberBetweenOneAndTen; 
switch (x) { 

case 2: 
case 4: 
case 6: 
case 8: 

case 10: { System.out.println("x is even"); break; } 

default: System.out.println("x is an odd number"); 

} 



 a. t c h 


The default case doesnt have to come at the end of the switch. Look for it in strange places 
such as the following: 

int x = 2; 
switch (x) { 

case 2: System.out.println("2"); 
default: System.out.println("default"); 
case 3: System.out.println("3" ) ; 
case 4: System.out.println("4"); 

} 







Running the preceding code prints this: 


2 

default 

3 

4 

And if we modify it so the only match is the default case , like this , 

int x = 7; 
switch (x) { 

case 2: System.out.printIn("2"); 
default: System.out.println("default"); 
case 3: System.out.println("3" ) ; 
case 4: System.out.printIn("4"); 

} 

then running the preceding code prints this: 

default 

3 

4 

The rule to remember is that default works just like any other case for fall-through! 


EXERCISE 5-1 


Creating a switch-case Statement 

Try creating a switch statement using a char value as the case. Include a default behavior if none of the 
char values match. 

I Make sure a char variable is declared before the switch statement. 

 Each case statement should be followed by a break. 

I The default case can be located at the end, middle, or top. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Creating Loops Constructs (OCA Objectives 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 
5.4, and 5.5) 

5.1 Create and use while loops. 

5.2 Create and use for loops including the enhanced for loop. 

5.3 Create and use do/while loops. 

5.4 Compare loop constructs. 

5.5 Use break and continue. 










Java loops come in three flavors: while, do, and for (and as of Java 5, the for loop has two 
variations). All three let you repeat a block of code as long as some condition is true or for a specific 
number of iterations. Youre probably familiar with loops from other languages, so even if youre 
somewhat new to Java, these wont be a problem to learn. 


Using while Loops 

The while loop is good when you dont know how many times a block or statement should repeat but you 
want to continue looping as long as some condition is true. Awhile statement looks like this: 

while (expression) { 

// do stuff 

} 

Or this: 

int X = 2; 
while(x == 2) { 

System.out.println(x); 

+ +X; 

} 

In this case, as in all loops, the expression (test) must evaluate toaboolean result. The body of the 
while loop will execute only if the expression (sometimes called the condition) results in a value of 
true. Once inside the loop, the loop body will repeat until the condition is no longer met because it 
evaluates to false. In the previous example, program control will enter the loop body because x is equal 
to 2. However, x is incremented in the loop, so when the condition is checked again it will evaluate to 
false and exit the loop. 

Any variables used in the expression of a while loop must be declared before the expression is 
evaluated. In other words, you cant say this: 

while (int x = 2) { } // not legal 

Then again, why would you? Instead of testing the variable, youd be declaring and initializing it, so it 
would always have the exact same value. Not much of a test condition! 

The key point to remember about a while loop is that it might not ever run. If the test expression is 
false the first time the while expression is checked, the loop body will be skipped and the program will 
begin executing at the first statement after the while loop. Look at the following example: 

int x = 8; 
while (x > 8) { 

System.out.println("in the loop"); 
x = 10; 

} 

System.out.println("past the loop"); 

Running this code produces 
past the loop 

Because the expression (x > 8) evaluates to false, none of the code within the while loop ever 


executes. 


Using do Loops 

The do loop is similar to the while loop, except the expression is not evaluated until after the do loops 
code is executed. Therefore, the code in a do loop is guaranteed to execute at least once. The following 
shows ado loop in action: 

do { 

System.out.printIn("Inside loop"); 

} while(false); 

The System . out. println () statement will print once, even though the expression evaluates to false. 
Remember, the do loop will always run the code in the loop body at least once. Be sure to note the use of 
the semicolon at the end of the while expression. 


9xJHEul 


atih 


As with if tests, look for while loops (and the while test in a do loop) with an expression that 
does not resolve to a boolean. Take a look at the following examples of legal and illegal while 

expressions: 


int x = 1; 
while (x) { } 

// Won't compile; x is not a boolean 

while (x = 5) { } 

// Won't compile; resolves to 5 
// (as the result of assignment) 

while (x == 5) { } 

// Legal, equality test 

while (true) { } 

// Legal 


Using for Loops 

As of Java 5, the for loop took on a second structure. Well call the old style of for loop the basic for 
loop, and well call the new style of for loop the enhanced for loop (its also sometimes called the 
for-each). Depending on what documentation you use, youll see both terms, along with for-in. The 
terms for-in, for-each, and enhanced for all refer to the same Java construct. 

The basic for loop is more flexible than the enhanced for loop, but the enhanced for loop was 
designed to make iterating through arrays and collections easier to code. 

The Basic for Loop 

The for loop is especially useful for flow control when you already know how many times you need to 
execute the statements in the loops block. The for loop declaration has three main parts besides the body 
of the loop: 


 Declaration and initialization of variables 




 The boolean expression (conditional test) 
n The iteration expression 

The three for declaration parts are separated by semicolons. The following two examples demonstrate 
the for loop. The first example shows the parts of a for loop in a pseudocode form, and the second 
shows a typical example of a for loop: 

for (/*Initialization*/ ; /*Condition*/ ; /* Iteration */) { 

/* loop body */ 

} 

for (int i = 0; i<10; i++) { 

System.out.printIn("i is " + i); 

} 

The Basic for Loop: Declaration and Initialization 

The first part of the for statement lets you declare and initialize zero, one, or multiple variables of the 
same type inside the parentheses after the for keyword. If you declare more than one variable of the same 
type, youll need to separate them with commas as follows: 

for (int x = 10, y = 3; y > 3; y++) { } 

The declaration and initialization happen before anything else in a for loop. And whereas the other two 
parts  the boolean test and the iteration expression  will run with each iteration of the loop, the 
declaration and initialization happen just once, at the very beginning. You also must know that the scope 
of variables declared in the for loop ends with the for loop! The following demonstrates this: 

for (int x = 1; x < 2; x++) { 

System.out.println(x); // Legal 

} 

System.out.println(x); // Not Legal! x is now out of scope 

// and cant be accessed. 

If you try to compile this, youll get something like this: 

Test.java:19: cannot resolve symbol 
symbol : variable x 
location: class Test 
System.out.println(x); 


Basic for Loop: Conditional (boolean) Expression 

The next section that executes is the conditional expression, which (like all other conditional tests) must 
evaluate to a boolean value. You can have only one logical expression, but it can be very complex. Look 
out for code that uses logical expressions like this: 

for (int x  0; ((((x < 10) && (y-- > 2)) | x == 3)); x++) { } 

The preceding code is legal, but the following is not: 


for (int x = 0; (x > 5) , (y < 2); x+ + ) { } // too many 

// expressions 

The compiler will let you know the problem: 

TestLong.j ava:2 0: ' ; ' expected 

for (int x = 0; (x > 5) , (y < 2); x+ + ) { } 

A 

The rule to remember is this: You can have only one test expression. 

In other words, you cant use multiple tests separated by commas, even though, the other two parts of a 
for statement can have multiple parts. 

Basic for Loop: Iteration Expression 

After each execution of the body of the for loop, the iteration expression is executed. This is where you 
get to say what you want to happen with each iteration of the loop. Remember that it always happens after 
the loop body runs! Look at the following: 

for (int x = 0; x < 1; x++) { 

// body code that doesn't change the value of x 

} 

This loop executes just once. The first time into the loop, x is set to 0, then x is tested to see if its less 
than 1 (which it is), and then the body of the loop executes. After the body of the loop runs, the iteration 
expression runs, incrementing x by 1. Next, the conditional test is checked, and since the result is now 
false, execution jumps to below the for loop and continues. 

Keep in mind that barring a forced exit, evaluating the iteration expression and then evaluating 
the conditional expression are always the last two things that happen in a for loop! 

Examples of forced exits include a break, a return, a System. exit (), and an exception, which will 
all cause a loop to terminate abrupdy, without running the iteration expression. Look at the following 
code: 


static boolean doStuffO { 

for (int x = 0; x < 3; x++) { 

System.out.printIn("in for loop"); 
return true; 

} 

return true; 

} 

Running this code produces 
in for loop 

The statement prints only once because a return causes execution to leave not just the current iteration 
of a loop, but the entire method. So the iteration expression never runs in that case. Table 5-1 lists the 
causes and results of abrupt loop termination. 


TABLE 5-1 


Causes of Early Loop Termination 



Code in Loop 

What Happens 

break 

Execution jumps immediately to the first statement after 


the for loop. 

return 

Execution jumps immediately back to the calling method. 

System.exit() 

All program execution stops; the VM shuts down. 


Basic for Loop: for Loop Issues 

None of the three sections of the for declaration are required! The following example is perfecdy legal 
(although not necessarily good practice): 

for( ; ; ) { 

System.out.println("Inside an endless loop"); 

} 

In this example, all the declaration parts are left out, so the for loop will act like an endless loop. 

For the exam, its important to know that with the absence of the initialization and increment sections, 
the loop will act like a while loop. The following example demonstrates how this is accomplished: 

int i = 0; 
for (;i<10;) { 

i++; 

// do some other work 

} 

The next example demonstrates a for loop with multiple variables in play. A comma separates the 
variables, and they must be of the same type. Remember that the variables declared in the for statement 
are all local to the for loop and cant be used outside the scope of the loop. 

for (int i = 0, j = 0; (i<10) && ( j <10) ; i++, j++) { 

System, out.println (" i is " + i + " j is 11 + j ) ; 

} 



atch 


Variable scope plays a large role in the exam. You need to know that a variable declared in the 
for loop cant be used beyond the for loop. But a variable only initialized in the for statement 
(but declared earlier) can be used beyond the loop. For example, the following is legal: 

int x = 3; 

for (x = 12; X < 20; X+ + ) { } 

System.out.println(x); 

But this is not: 


for (int x = 3; x < 20; x++) { } System.out.println(x); 











The last thing to note is that all three sections of the for loop are independent of each other. The three 
expressions in the for statement dont need to operate on the same variables, although they typically do. 
But even the iterator expression, which many mistakenly call the increment expression, doesnt need to 
increment or set anything; you can put in virtually any arbitrary code statements that you want to happen 
with each iteration of the loop. Look at the following: 

int b = 3; 

for (int a = 1; b != 1; System.out.printIn("iterate")) { 

b = b - a; 

} 

The preceding code prints 

iterate 

iterate 



Jiatc h 


Many questions in the Java 8 exams list "Compilation fails " and "An exception occurs at 
runtime" as possible answers, making them more difficult because you cant simply work 
through the behavior of the code. You must first make sure the code isnt violating any 
fundamental rules that will lead to a compiler error and then look for possible exceptions. 
Only after youve satisfied those two should you dig into the logic and flow of the code in the 
question. 


The Enhanced for Loop (for Arrays) 

The enhanced for loop, new as of Java 5, is a specialized for loop that simplifies looping through an 
array or a collection. In this chapter were going to focus on using the enhanced for to loop through 
arrays. In Chapter 6 well revisit the enhanced for, when we discuss the ArrayList collection class 
where the enhanced for really comes into its own. 

Instead of having three components, the enhanced for has two. Lets loop through an array the basic 
(old) way and then using the enhanced for: 

int [] a = {1,2,3,4}; 
for(int x = 0; x < a.length; x+ + ) 

System.out.print(a[x] ) ; 
for(int n : a) 

System.out.print(n); 

This produces the following output: 

12341234 

More formally, lets describe the enhanced for as follows: 
for(declaration : expression) 


// basic for loop 
// enhanced for loop 





The two pieces of the for statement are 


 declaration The newly declared block variable of a type compatible with the elements of 
the array you are accessing. This variable will be available within the for block, and its value 
will be the same as the current array element. 

 expression This must evaluate to the array you want to loop through. This could be an array 
variable or a method call that returns an array. The array can be any type: primitives, objects, or 
even arrays of arrays. 


Using the preceding definitions, lets look at some legal and illegal enhanced for declarations: 

int x; 
long x2; 

long [] la = {7L, 8L, 9L}; 

int [][] twoDee = {{1,2,3}, {4,5,6}, {7,8,9}}; 

String [] sNums = {"one", "two", "three"}; 

Animal [] animals = {new Dog(), new Cat()}; 


// legal 'for' declarations 


for(long y : la ) ; // 

for(int[] n : twoDee) ; // 

for(int n2 : twoDee[2]) ; // 

for(String s : sNums) ; // 

for(Object o : sNums) ; // 

// 

for(Animal a : animals) ; // 

// 


// ILLEGAL 'for' declarations 


for(x2 : la) ; // 
for(int x4 : twoDee) ; // 
for(int x3 : la) ; // 
for(Dog d : animals) ; // 


loop thru an array of longs 
loop thru the array of arrays 
loop thru the 3rd sub-array 
loop thru the array of Strings 
set an Object reference to 
each String 

set an Animal reference to each 
element 


x2 is already declared 
can't stuff an array into an int 
can't stuff a long into an int 
you might get a Cat! 


The enhanced for loop assumes that, barring an early exit from the loop, youll always loop through 
every element of the array. The following discussions of break and continue apply to both the basic and 
enhanced for loops. 


Using break and continue 

The break and continue keywords are used to stop either the entire loop (break) or just the current 
iteration (continue). Typically, if youre using break or continue, youll do an if test within the loop, 
and if some condition becomes true (or false depending on the program), you want to get out 
immediately. The difference between them is whether or not you continue with a new iteration or jump to 
the first statement below the loop and continue from there. 


atch 





Remember, continue statements must be inside a loop; otherwise, youll get a compiler error, 
break statements must be used inside either a loop or a switch statement. 


The break statement causes the program to stop execution of the innermost loop and start processing 
the next line of code after the block. 

The continue statement causes only the current iteration of the innermost loop to cease and the next 
iteration of the same loop to start if the condition of the loop is met. When using a continue statement 
with a for loop, you need to consider the effects that continue has on the loop iteration. Examine the 
following code: 

for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) { 

System.out.printIn("Inside loop"); 
continue; 

} 

The question is, is this an endless loop? The answer is no. When the continue statement is hit, the 
iteration expression still runs! It runs just as though the current iteration ended in the natural way. So in 
the preceding example, i will still increment before the condition ( i < 10) is checked again. 

Most of the time, a continue is used within an if test as follows: 

for (int i = 0; i < 10; i++) { 

System.out.println("Inside loop"); 
if (foo.doStuff() == 5) { 

continue; 

} 

// more loop code, that won't be reached when the above if 
// test is true 

} 

Unlabeled Statements 

Both the break statement and the continue statement can be unlabeled or labeled. Although its far more 
common to use break and continue unlabeled, the exam expects you to know how labeled break and 
continue statements work. As stated before, a break statement (unlabeled) will exit out of the innermost 
looping construct and proceed with the next line of code beyond the loop block. The following example 
demonstrates a break statement: 

boolean problem = true; 
while (true) { 
if (problem) { 

System.out.println("There was a problem"); 
break; 

} 

} 

// next line of code 

In the previous example, the break statement is unlabeled. The following is an example of an 
unlabeled continue statement: 





while (!EOF) { 

// read a field from a file 

if (wrongField) { 

continue; // move to the next field in the file 

} 

// otherwise do other stuff with the field 

} 

In this example, a file is being read one field at a time. When an error is encountered, the program 
moves to the next field in the file and uses the continue statement to go back into the loop (if it is not at 
the end of the file) and keeps reading the various fields. If the break command were used instead, the 
code would stop reading the file once the error occurred and move on to the next line of code after the 
loop. The continue statement gives you a way to say, This particular iteration of the loop needs to stop, 
but not the whole loop itself. I just dont want the rest of the code in this iteration to finish, so do the 
iteration expression and then start over with the test, and dont worry about what was below the 
continue statement. 


Labeled Statements 

Although many statements in a Java program can be labeled, its most common to use labels with loop 
statements like for or while, in conjunction with break and continue statements. A label statement must 
be placed just before the statement being labeled, and it consists of a valid identifier that ends with a 
colon (:). 

You need to understand the difference between labeled and unlabeled break and continue. The 
labeled varieties are needed only in situations where you have a nested loop, and they need to indicate 
which of the nested loops you want to break from, or from which of the nested loops you want to continue 
with the next iteration. A break statement will exit out of the labeled loop, as opposed to the innermost 
loop, if the break keyword is combined with a label. 

Heres an example of what a label looks like: 

f OO: 

for (int x = 3; x < 20; x++) { 

while(y >7) { 

y--; 

} 

} 

The label must adhere to the rules for a valid variable name and should adhere to the Java naming 
convention. The syntax for the use of a label name in conjunction with a break statement is the break 
keyword, then the label name, followed by a semicolon. A more complete example of the use of a labeled 
break statement is as follows: 


true; 


boolean isTrue = 
outer: 

for(int i=0; i<5; i++) { 

while (isTrue) { 

System.out.println("Hello"); 
break outer; 

} // end of inner while loop 

System.out.println("Outer loop."); // Won't print 
} // end of outer for loop 

System.out.println("Good-Bye"); 

Running this code produces 

Hello 

Good-Bye 

In this example, the word Hello will be printed one time. Then, the labeled break statement will be 
executed, and the flow will exit out of the loop labeled outer. The next line of code will then print Good- 
Bye. 

Lets see what will happen if the continue statement is used instead of the break statement. The 
following code example is similar to the preceding one, with the exception of substituting continue for 
break: 


outer: 

for (int i=0; i<5; i++) { 

for (int j = 0; j<5; j++) { 

System.out.println("Hello"); 
continue outer; 

} // end of inner loop 

System.out.println("outer"); // Never prints 

} 

System.out.println("Good-Bye"); 

Running this code produces 

Hello 

Hello 

Hello 

Hello 

Hello 

Good-Bye 

In this example, Hello will be printed five times. After the continue statement is executed, the flow 
continues with the next iteration of the loop identified with the label. Finally, when the condition in the 
outer loop evaluates to false, this loop will finish and Good - Bye will be printed. 


EXERCISE 5-2 


Creating a Labeled while Loop 

Try creating a labeled while loop. Make the label outer and provide a condition to check whether a 
variable age is less than or equal to 21. Within the loop, increment age by 1. Every time the program goes 




through the loop, check whether age is 16. If it is, print the message get your drivers license and 
continue to the outer loop. If not, print Another year. 

; The outer label should appear just before the while loop begins, 
a Make sure age is declared outside of the while loop. 



atc h 


Labeled continue and break statements must be inside the loop that has the same label name; 
otherwise, the code will not compile. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Handling Exceptions (OCA Objectives 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, and 
8.5) 

8.1 Differentiate among checked exceptions, unchecked exceptions, and errors. 

8.2 Create a try-catch block and determine how exceptions alter normal program flow. 

8.3 Describe the advantages of Exception handling. 

8.4 Create and invoke a method that throws an exception. 

8.5 Recognize common exception classes (such as NullPointerException, ArithmeticException, 
ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException, ClassCastException) (sic) 

An old maxim in software development says that 80 percent of the work is used 20 percent of the time. 
The 80 percent refers to the effort required to check and handle errors. In many languages, writing 
program code that checks for and deals with errors is tedious and bloats the application source into 
confusing spaghetti. Still, error detection and handling may be the most important ingredient of any robust 
application. Here are some of the benefits of Javas exception-handling features: 

 It arms developers with an elegant mechanism for handling errors that produces efficient and 
organized error-handling code. 

 It allows developers to detect errors easily without writing special code to test return values. 

 It lets us keep exception -handling code cleanly separated from exception -generating code. 

 It also lets us use the same exception-handling code to deal with a range of possible 
exceptions. 

Java 7 added several new exception-handling capabilities to the language. For our purposes, Oracle 
split the various exception-handling topics into two main parts: 

1. The OCA exam covers the Java 6 version of exception handling. 







2. The OCP exam adds the new exception features added in Java 7. 

In order to mirror Oracles OCA 8 objectives versus the OCP 8 objectives, this chapter will give you 
only the basics of exception handlingbut plenty to handle the OCA 8 exam 


Catching an Exception Using try and catch 

Before we begin, lets introduce some terminology. The term exception means exceptional condition 
and is an occurrence that alters the normal program flow. A bunch of things can lead to exceptions, 
including hardware failures, resource exhaustion, and good old bugs. When an exceptional event occurs in 
Java, an exception is said to be thrown. The code thats responsible for doing something about the 
exception is called an exception handler, and it catches the thrown exception. 

Exception handling works by transferring the execution of a program to an appropriate exception 
handler when an exception occurs. For example, if you call a method that opens a file but the file cannot 
be opened, execution of that method will stop, and code that you wrote to deal with this situation will be 
run. Therefore, we need a way to tell the JVM what code to execute when a certain exception happens. To 
do this, we use the try and catch keywords. The try is used to define a block of code in which 
exceptions may occur. This block of code is called a guarded region (which really means risky code 
goes here). One or more catch clauses match a specific exception (or group of exceptionsmore on 
that later) to a block of code that handles it. Heres how it looks in pseudocode: 

1. try { 

2. // This is the first line of the "guarded region" 

3. // that is governed by the try keyword. 

4. // Put code here that might cause some kind of exception. 

5. //We may have many code lines here or just one. 

6. } 

7. catch(MyFirstException) { 

8. // Put code here that handles this exception. 

9. // This is the next line of the exception handler. 

10. // This is the last line of the exception handler. 

11. } 

12. catch(MySecondException) { 

13. // Put code here that handles this exception 

14. } 

15 . 

16. // Some other unguarded (normal, non-risky) code begins here 

In this pseudocode example, lines 2 through 5 constitute the guarded region that is governed by the t ry 
clause. Line 7 is an exception handler for an exception of type MyFirstException. Line 12 is an 
exception handler for an exception of type MySecondException. Notice that the catch blocks 
immediately follow the try block. This is a requirement; if you have one or more catch blocks, they must 
immediately follow the try block. Additionally, the catch blocks must all follow each other, without any 
other statements or blocks in between. Also, the order in which the catch blocks appear matters, as well 
see a little later. 

Execution of the guarded region starts at line 2. If the program executes all the way past line 5 with no 
exceptions being thrown, execution will transfer to line 15 and continue downward. However, if at any 
time in lines 2 through 5 (the try block) an exception of type MyFirstException is thrown, execution 
will immediately transfer to line 7. Lines 8 through 10 will then be executed so that the entire catch 


block runs, and then execution will transfer to line 15 and continue. 

Note that if an exception occurred on, say, line 3 of the t ry block, the remaining lines in the t ry block 
(4 and 5) would never be executed. Once control jumps to the catch block, it never returns to complete 
the balance of the t ry block. This is exacdy what you want, though. Imagine that your code looks 
something like this pseudocode: 

try { 

getTheFileFromOverNetwork 
readFromThe Fi1eAndPopulat eTab1e 

} 

catch(CantGetFileFromNetwork) { 
displayNetworkErrorMessage 

} 

This pseudocode demonstrates how you typically work with exceptions. Code thats dependent on a risky 
operation (as populating a table with file data is dependent on getting the file from the network) is 
grouped into a t ry block in such a way that if, say, the first operation fails, you wont continue trying to 
run other code thats also guaranteed to fail. In the pseudocode example, you wont be able to read from 
the file if you cant get the file off the network in the first place. 

One of the benefits of using exception handling is that code to handle any particular exception 
that may occur in the governed region needs to be written only once. Returning to our earlier code 
example, there maybe three different places in our try block that can generate a MyFirstException, but 
wherever it occurs it will be handled by the same catch block (on line 7). Well discuss more benefits of 
exception handling near the end of this chapter. 


Using finally 

Although try and catch provide a terrific mechanism for trapping and handling exceptions, we are left 
with the problem of how to clean up after ourselves if an exception occurs. Because execution transfers 
out of the t ry block as soon as an exception is thrown, we cant put our cleanup code at the bottom of the 
try block and expect it to be executed if an exception occurs. Almost as bad an idea would be placing 
our cleanup code in each of the catch blockslets see why. 

Exception handlers are a poor place to clean up after the code in the t ry block because each handler 
then requires its own copy of the cleanup code. If, for example, you allocated a network socket or opened 
a file somewhere in the guarded region, each exception handler would have to close the file or release the 
socket. That would make it too easy to forget to do cleanup and also lead to a lot of redundant code. To 
address this problem, Java offers the finally block. 

A finally block encloses code that is always executed at some point after the try block, whether an 
exception was thrown or not. Even if there is a return statement in the try block, the finally block 
executes right after the return statement is encountered and before the return executes! 

This is the right place to close your files, release your network sockets, and perform any other cleanup 
your code requires. If the try block executes with no exceptions, the finally block is executed 
immediately after the try block completes. If there was an exception thrown, the finally block executes 
immediately after the proper catch block completes. Lets look at another pseudocode example: 


1: try { 

2: // This is the first line of the "guarded region". 

3 : } 

4: catch(MyFirstException) { 

5: // Put code here that handles this exception 

6 : } 

7: catch(MySecondException) { 

8: // Put code here that handles this exception 

9: } 

10: finally { 

11: // Put code here to release any resource we 

12: // allocated in the try clause 

13: } 

14 : 

15: // More code here 

As before, execution starts at the first line of the try block, line 2. If there are no exceptions thrown in 
the try block, execution transfers to line 11, the first line of the finally block. On the other hand, if a 
MySecondException is thrown while the code in the try block is executing, execution transfers to the 
first line of that exception handler, line 8 in the catch clause. After all the code in the catch clause is 
executed, the program moves to line 11, the first line of the finally clause. Repeat after me: finally 
always runs! Okay, well have to refine that a little, but for now, start burning in the idea that finally 
always runs. If an exception is thrown, finally runs. If an exception is not thrown, finally runs. If the 
exception is caught, finally runs. If the exception is not caught, finally runs. Later well look at the 
few scenarios in which finally might not run or complete. 

Remember, finally clauses are not required. If you dont write one, your code will compile and run 
just fine. In fact, if you have no resources to clean up after your t ry block completes, you probably dont 
need a finally clause. Also, because the compiler doesnt even require catch clauses, sometimes youll 
run across code that has a try block immediately followed by a finally block. Such code is useful when 
the exception is going to be passed back to the calling method, as explained in the next section. Using a 
finally block allows the cleanup code to execute even when there isnt a catch clause. 

The following legal code demonstrates a try with a finally but no catch: 

try { 

// do stuff 
} finally { 

// clean up 

} 

The following legal code demonstrates a try, catch, and finally: 

try { 

// do stuff 

} catch (SomeException ex) { 

// do exception handling 
} finally { 

// clean up 

} 

The following ILLEGAL code demonstrates a try without a catch or finally: 

try { 

// do stuff 

} 



// need a catch or finally here 
System.out.println("out of try block"); 

The following ILLEGAL code demonstrates a misplaced catch block: 

try { 

//do stuff 

} 

// can't have code between try/catch 
System.out.println("out of try block"); 
catch(Exception ex) { } 



 a t c h 


It is illegal to use a try clause without either a catch clause or a finally clause. A try clause 
by itself will result in a compiler error. Any catch clauses must immediately follow the try 
block. Any finally clause must immediately follow the last catch clause (or it must 
immediately follow the try block if there is no catch). It is legal to omit either the catch 
clause or the finally clause, but not both. 


Propagating Uncaught Exceptions 

Why arent catch clauses required? What happens to an exception thats thrown in a t ry block when 
there is no catch clause waiting for it? Actually, theres no requirement that you code a catch clause for 
every possible exception that could be thrown from the corresponding t ry block. In fact, its doubtful that 
you could accomplish such a feat! If a method doesnt provide a catch clause for a particular exception, 
that method is said to be ducking the exception (or passing the buck). 

So what happens to a ducked exception? Before we discuss that, we need to briefly review the concept 
of the call stack. Most languages have the concept of a method stack or a call stack. Simply put, the call 
stack is the chain of methods that your program executes to get to the current method. If your program 
starts in method main () and main () calls method a (), which calls method b (), which in turn calls 
method c (), the call stack consists of the following: 

c 

b 

a 

main 

We will represent the stack as growing upward (although it can also be visualized as growing 
downward). As you can see, the last method called is at the top of the stack, while the first calling method 
is at the bottom. The method at the very top of the stack trace would be the method you were currendy 
executing. If we move back down the call stack, were moving from the current method to the previously 
called method. Figure 5-1 illustrates a way to think about how the call stack in Java works. 




I) The call stack while method3 () is running. 


method2 invokes method3 
methodl invokes method2 
main invokes methodl 
main begins 

The order in which methods are put on the call stack 


4 

3 

2 

I 


method3() 


method2() 


methodl() 


main() 


2) The call stack after method3 () completes 
Execution returns to method2 () 


1 

2 
3 


method2() 
methodl() 
main() 


method2 () will complete 
methodl () will complete 
main () will complete and the JVM will exit 


The order in which methods complete 


FIGURE 5-1 


The Java method call stack 


Now lets examine what happens to ducked exceptions. Imagine a building, say, five stories high, and 
at each floor there is a deck or balcony. Now imagine that on each deck, one person is standing holding a 
baseball mitt. Exceptions are like balls dropped from person to person, starting from the roof. An 
exception is first thrown from the top of the stack (in other words, the person on the roof); and if it isnt 
caught by the same person who threw it (the person on the roof), it drops down the call stack to the 
previous method, which is the person standing on the deck one floor down. If not caught there by the 
person one floor down, the exception/bail again drops down to the previous method (person on the next 
floor down), and so on, until it is caught or until it reaches the very bottom of the call stack. This is called 
exception propagation. 

If an exception reaches the bottom of the call stack, its like reaching the bottom of a very long drop; 
the ball explodes, and so does your program. An exception thats never caught will cause your application 
to stop running. A description (if one is available) of the exception will be displayed, and the call stack 
will be dumped. This helps you debug your application by telling you what exception was thrown, from 
what method it was thrown, and what the stack looked like at the time. 











O Aten 


You can keep throwing an exception down through the methods on the stack. But what 
happens when you get to the main() method at the bottom? You can throw the exception out of 
main() as well. This results in the JVM halting , and the stack trace will be printed to the 
output. The following code throws an exception: 

class TestEx { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
doStuff(); 

} 

static void doStuff() { 

doMoreStuff(); 

} 

static void doMoreStuff() { 

int x = 5/0; // Can't divide by zero! 

// ArithmeticException is thrown here 

} 

} 

It prints out a stack trace something like this: 

%java TestEx 

Exception in thread "main" java.lang.ArithmeticException: / by zero 
at TestEx.doMoreStuff(TestEx.java:10) 
at TestEx.doStuff(TestEx.j ava:7) 
at TestEx.main(TestEx.j ava:3) 


EXERCISE 5-3 


Propagating and Catching an Exception 

In this exercise, youre going to create two methods that deal with exceptions. One of the methods is the 
main () method, which will call another method. If an exception is thrown in the other method, main () 
must deal with it. A finally statement will be included to indicate that the program has completed. The 
method that main () will call will be named reverse, and it will reverse the order of the characters in a 
String. If the string contains no characters, reverse will propagate an exception up to the main() 
method. 


1. Create a class called Propagate and a main () method, which will remain empty for now. 

2. Create a method called reverse. It takes an argument of a string and returns a String. 

3. In reverse, check whether the string has a length of 0 by using the string. length() 
method. If the length is 0, the reverse method will throw an exception. 

4. Now include the code to reverse the order of the St ring. Because this isnt the main topic of 
this chapter, the reversal code has been provided, but feel free to try it on your own. 






String reverseStr = "" ; 
for(int i=s.length()-1;i>=0;--i) { 

reverseStr += s.charAt(i); 

} 

return reverseStr; 

5. Now in the main () method you will attempt to call this method and deal with any potential 
exceptions. Additionally, you will include a finally statement that displays when main () has 
finished. 


s 


Defining Exceptions 

We have been discussing exceptions as a concept. We know that they are thrown when a problem of some 
type happens, and we know what effect they have on the flow of our program In this section, we will 
develop the concepts further and use exceptions in functional Java code. 

Earlier we said that an exception is an occurrence that alters the normal program flow. But because 
this is Java, anything thats not a primitive must be.. .an object. Exceptions are no different. Every 
exception is an instance of a class that has class Exception in its inheritance hierarchy. In other words, 
exceptions are always some subclass of j ava. lang . Exception. 

When an exception is thrown, an object of a particular Exception subtype is instantiated and handed 
to the exception handler as an argument to the catch clause. An actual catch clause looks like this: 

try { 

// some code here 

} 

catch (ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException e) { 
e.printStackTrace(); 

} 

In this example, e is an instance of the ArraylndexOutOf BoundsException class. As with any other 
object, you can call its methods. 


Exception Hierarchy 

All exception classes are subtypes of class Exception. This class derives from the class Throwable 
(which derives from the class Ob j ect). Figure 5-2 shows the hierarchy for the exception classes. 




As you can see, there are two subclasses that derive fromThrowable: Exception and Error. Classes 
that derive from Error represent unusual situations that are not caused by program errors and indicate 
things that would not normally happen during program execution, such as the JVM running out of memory. 
Generally, your application wont be able to recover from an Error, so youre not required to handle 
them. If your code does not handle them (and it usually wont), it will still compile with no trouble. 
Although often thought of as exceptional conditions, Errors are technically not exceptions because they 
do not derive from class Exception. 

In general, an exception represents something that happens not as a result of a programming error, but 
rather because some resource is not available or some other condition required for correct execution is 
not present. For example, if your application is supposed to communicate with another application or 
computer that is not answering, this is an exception that is not caused by a bug. Figure 5-2 also shows a 
subtype of Exception called RuntimeException. These exceptions are a special case because they 
sometimes do indicate program errors. They can also represent rare, difficult-to-handle exceptional 
conditions. Runtime exceptions are discussed in greater detail later in this chapter. 

























Java provides many exception classes, most of which have quite descriptive names. There are two 
ways to get information about an exception. The first is from the type of the exception itself. The next is 
from information that you can get from the exception object. Class Th rowable (at the top of the 
inheritance tree for exceptions) provides its descendants with some methods that are useful in exception 
handlers. One of these is printStackTrace (). As you would expect, if you call an exception objects 
printStackTrace( ) method, as in the earlier example, a stack trace from where the exception occurred 
will be printed. 

We discussed that a call stack builds upward with the most recendy called method at the top. You will 
notice that the printStackTrace( ) method prints the most recently entered method first and continues 
down, printing the name of each method as it works its way down the call stack (this is called unwinding 
the stack) from the top. 



Jiatch 


For the exam, you dont need to know any of the methods contained in the Throwable classes, 
including Exception and Error. You are expected to know that Exception , Error , 

RuntimeException, and Throwable types can all be thrown using the throw keyword and can 
all be caught (although you rarely will catch anything other than Exception subtypes). 


Handling an Entire Class Hierarchy of Exceptions 

Weve discussed that the catch keyword allows you to specify a particular type of exception to catch. 

You can actually catch more than one type of exception in a single catch clause. If the exception class that 
you specify in the catch clause has no subclasses, then only the specified class of exception will be 
caught. However, if the class specified in the catch clause does have subclasses, any exception object 
that subclasses the specified class will be caught as well. 

For example, class indexOutOfBoundsException has two subclasses, 

ArraylndexOutOf BoundsException and St ring IndexOutOfBoundsException. You may want to write 
one exception handler that deals with exceptions produced by either type of boundary error, but you might 
not be concerned with which exception you actually have. In this case, you could write a catch clause 
like the following: 

try { 

// Some code here that can throw a boundary exception 

} 

catch (IndexOutOfBoundsException e) { 
e.printStackTrace(); 

} 

If any code in the try block throws ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException or 
StringlndexOutOf BoundsException, the exception will be caught and handled. This can be 
convenient, but it should be used sparingly. By specifying an exception classs superclass in your catch 
clause, youre discarding valuable information about the exception. You can, of course, find out exacdy 
what exception class you have, but if youre going to do that, youre better off writing a separate catch 
clause for each exception type of interest. 




Resist the temptation to write a single catchall exception handler such as the following: 

try { 

// some code 

} 

catch (Exception e) { 
e.printStackTrace(); 

} 

This code will catch every exception generated. Of course, no single exception handler can properly 
handle every exception, and programming in this way defeats the design objective. Exception 
handlers that trap many errors at once will probably reduce the reliability of your program, because 
its likely that an exception will be caught that the handler does not know how to handle. 


Exception Matching 

If you have an exception hierarchy composed of a superclass exception and a number of subtypes, and 
youre interested in handling one of the subtypes in a special way but want to handle all the rest together, 
you need write only two catch clauses. 

When an exception is thrown, Java will try to find (by looking at the available catch clauses from the 
top down) a catch clause for the exception type. If it doesnt find one, it will search for a handler for a 
supertype of the exception. If it does not find a catch clause that matches a supertype for the exception, 
then the exception is propagated down the call stack. This process is called exception matching. Lets 
look at an example. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 


import j ava.io.*; 
public class ReadData { 

public static void main(String args []) { 

try { 

RandomAccessFile raf = 

new RandomAccessFile("myfile.txt", "r"); 

byte b[] = new byte [1000]; 

raf.readFully(b # 0, 1000); 

} 

catch(FileNotFoundException e) { 

System.err.printIn("File not found"); 
System.err.printIn(e.getMessage()); 
e.printStackTrace(); 

} 

catch(IOException e) { 

System.err.println("IO Error"); 

System.err.println(e.toString()); 
e.printStackTrace(); 

} 

} 

} 


This short program attempts to open a file and to read some data from it. Opening and reading files can 
generate many exceptions, most of which are some type of IOException. Imagine that in this program 



were interested in knowing only whether the exact exception is a FileNotFoundException. Otherwise, 
we dont care exacdy what the problem is. 

FileNotFoundException is a subclass of lOException. Therefore, we could handle it in the catch 
clause that catches all subtypes of lOException, but then we would have to test the exception to 
determine whether it was a FileNotFoundException. Instead, we coded a special exception handler for 
the FileNotFoundException and a separate exception handler for all other lOException subtypes. 

If this code generates a FileNotFoundException, it will be handled by the catch clause that begins 
at line 10. If it generates another lOException perhaps EOFException, which is a subclass of 
lOException it will be handled by the catch clause that begins at line 15. If some other exception is 
generated, such as a runtime exception of some type, neither catch clause will be executed and the 
exception will be propagated down the call stack. 

Notice that the catch clause for the FileNotFoundException was placed above the handler for the 
lOException. This is really important! If we do it the opposite way, the program will not compile. The 
handlers for the most specific exceptions must always be placed above those for more general exceptions. 
The following will not compile: 

try { 

// do risky 10 things 
} catch (lOException e) { 

// handle general IOExceptions 
} catch (FileNotFoundException ex) { 

// handle just FileNotFoundException 

} 

Youll get a compiler error something like this: 

TestEx.java:15: exception java.io.FileNotFoundException has 
already been caught 
} catch (FileNotFoundException ex) { 

A 

If you think back to the people with baseball mitts (in the section Propagating Uncaught Exceptions), 
imagine that the most general mitts are the largest and can thus catch many kinds of balls. An 
lOException mitt is large enough and flexible enough to catch any type of lOException. So if the person 
on the fifth floor (say, Fred) has a big ol lOException mitt, he cant help but catch a 
FileNotFoundException ball with it. And if the guy (say, Jimmy) on the second floor is holding a 
FileNotFoundException mitt, that FileNotFoundException ball will never get to him because it will 
always be stopped by Fred on the fifth floor, standing there with his big-enough-for-any-lOException 
mitt. 

So what do you do with exceptions that are siblings in the class hierarchy? If one Exception class is 
not a subtype or supertype of the other, then the order in which the catch clauses are placed doesnt 
matter. 


Exception Declaration and the Public Interface 

So, how do we know that some method throws an exception that we have to catch? Just as a method must 
specify what type and how many arguments it accepts and what is returned, the exceptions that a method 
can throw must be declared (unless the exceptions are subclasses of RuntimeException). The list of 
thrown exceptions is part of a methods public interface. The throws keyword is used as follows to list 
the exceptions that a method can throw: 


void myFunctionO throws MyExceptionl, MyException2 { 

// code for the method here 

} 

This method has a void return type, accepts no arguments, and declares that it can throw one of two types 
of exceptions: either type MyExceptionl or type MyException2. (Just because the method declares that it 
throws an exception doesnt mean it always will. It just tells the world that it might.) 

Suppose your method doesnt direcdy throw an exception but calls a method that does. You can choose 
not to handle the exception yourself and instead just declare it, as though it were your method that actually 
throws the exception. If you do declare the exception that your method might get from another method and 
you dont provide a t ry/catch for it, then the method will propagate back to the method that called your 
method and will either be caught there or continue on to be handled by a method further down the stack. 

Any method that might throw an exception (unless its a subclass of RuntimeException) must declare 
the exception. That includes methods that arent actually throwing it direcdy, but are ducking and letting 
the exception pass down to the next method in the stack. If you duck an exception, it is just as if you 
were the one actually throwing the exception. RuntimeException subclasses are exempt, so the compiler 
wont check to see if youve declared them. But all non-RuntimeExceptions are considered checked 
exceptions because the compiler checks to be certain youve acknowledged that bad things could happen 
here. 

Remember this: 

Each method must either handle all checked exceptions by supplying a catch clause or list each unhandled checked exception as a 
thrown exception. 

This rule is referred to as Javas handle or declare requirement (sometimes called catch or declare). 



 a t C h 


Look for code that invokes a method declaring an exception, where the calling method doesnt 
handle or declare the checked exception. The following code (which uses the throw keyword to 
throw an exception manually-more on this next) has two big problems that the compiler will 
prevent: 

void doStuffO { 
doMore(); 

} 

void doMore () { 

throw new IOException(); 

} 

First, the doMore () method throws a checked exception but does not declare it! But suppose 
we fix the doMore () method as follows: 

void doMore() throws IOException { ... } 

The doStufff) method is still in trouble because it, too, must declare the IOException , 

unless it handles it by providing a try/catch , with a catch clause that can take an 
IOException. 




Again, some exceptions are exempt from this rule. An object of type RuntimeException maybe 
thrown from any method without being specified as part of the methods public interface (and a handler 
need not be present). And even if a method does declare a RuntimeException, the calling method is 
under no obligation to handle or declare it. RuntimeException, Error, and all their subtypes are 
unchecked exceptions, and unchecked exceptions do not have to be specified or handled. Here is an 
example: 

import j ava.io.*; 

class Test { 

public int myMethodl() throws EOFException { 
return myMethod2(); 

} 

public int myMethod2() throws EOFException { 

// code that actually could throw the exception goes here 
return 1; 

} 

} 

Lets look at myMethodl( ). Because EOFException subclasses lOException and lOException 
subclasses Exception, it is a checked exception and must be declared as an exception that may be thrown 
by this method. But where will the exception actually come from? The public interface for method 
myMethod2 () called here declares that an exception of this type can be thrown. Whether that method 
actually throws the exception itself or calls another method that throws it is unimportant to us; we simply 
know that we either have to catch the exception or declare that we threw it. The method myMethodl ( ) 
does not catch the exception, so it declares that it throws it. Now lets look at another legal example, 
myMethod3(): 

public void myMethod3() { 

// code that could throw a NullPointerException goes here 

} 

According to the comment, this method can throw a NullPointerException. Because 
RuntimeException is the superclass of NullPointerException, it is an unchecked exception and need 
not be declared. We can see that myMethod3() does not declare any exceptions. 

Runtime exceptions are referred to as unchecked exceptions. All other exceptions are checked 
exceptions, and they dont derive from j ava. lang . RuntimeException. A checked exception must be 
caught somewhere in your code. If you invoke a method that throws a checked exception but you dont 
catch the checked exception somewhere, your code will not compile. Thats why theyre called checked 
exceptions: the compiler checks to make sure theyre handled or declared. A number of the methods in the 
Java API throw checked exceptions, so you will often write exception handlers to cope with exceptions 
generated by methods you didnt write. 

You can also throw an exception yourself, and that exception can be either an existing exception from 
the Java API or one of your own. To create your own exception, you simply subclass Exception (or one 
of its subclasses) as follows: 

class MyException extends Exception { } 


And if you throw the exception, the compiler will guarantee that you declare it as follows: 


class TestEx { 
void doStuffO { 

throw new MyException(); // Throw a checked exception 

} 

} 

The preceding code upsets the compiler: 

TestEx.java:6: unreported exception MyException; must be caught or 
declared to be thrown 

throw new MyException(); 

A 



Jatch 


When an object of a subtype of Exception is thrown, it must be handled or declared. These 
objects are called "checked exceptions " and include all exceptions except those that are 
subtypes of RuntimeException, which are unchecked exceptions. Be ready to spot methods 
that dont follow the "handle or declare" rule, such as this: 

class MyException extends Exception { 
void someMethod () { 

doStuff(); 

} 

void doStuffO throws MyException { 
try { 

throw new MyException(); 

} 

catch(MyException me) { 
throw me; 

} 

} 

} 

You need to recognize that this code wont compile. If you try ; youll get this: 

MyException.java:3: unreported exception MyException; 
must be caught or declared to be thrown 
doStuff(); 

A 

Notice that someMethod() fails either to handle or declare the exception that can be thrown by 
doStuf f( ). In the next pages, well discuss several ways to deal with this sort of situation. 


You need to know how an Error compares with checked and unchecked exceptions. Objects of type 
Error are not Exception objects, although they do represent exceptional conditions. Both Exception 
and Error share a common superclass, Throwable; thus, both can be thrown using the throw keyword. 
When an Error or a subclass of Error (like stackOverflowError) is thrown, its unchecked. You are 
not required to catch Error objects or Error subtypes. You can also throw an Error yourself (although, 
other than AssertionError, you probably wont ever want to), and you can catch one, but again, you 
probably wont. What, for example, would you actually do if you got an OutOfMemoryError? Its not like 




you can tell the garbage collector to run; you can bet the JVM fought desperately to save itself (and 
reclaimed all the memory it could) by the time you got the error. In other words, dont expect the JVM at 
that point to say, Run the garbage collector? Oh, thanks so much for telling me. That just never occurred 
to me. Sure, Ill get right on it. Even better, what would you do if a VirtualMachineError arose? Your 
program is toast by the time youd catch the error, so theres really no point in trying to catch one of these 
babies. Just remember, though, that you can! The following compiles just fine: 

class TestEx { 

public static void main 
badMethod(); 

} 

static void badMethod() 
doStuff(); 

} 

static void doStuff() { 

try { 

throw new Error(); 

} 

catch(Error me) { 
throw me; 

} 

} 

} 

If we were throwing a checked exception rather than Error, then the doStuff () method would need to 
declare the exception. But remember, since Error is not a subtype of Exception, it doesnt need to be 
declared. Youre free to declare it if you like, but the compiler just doesnt care one way or another when 
or how the Error is thrown or by whom. 


(String [] args) { 


{ // No need to declare an Error 


// No need to declare an Error 


// We catch it, but then rethrow it 


Because Java has checked exceptions, its commonly said that Java forces developers to handle 
exceptions. Yes, Java forces us to write exception handlers for each exception that can occur during 
normal operation, but its up to us to make the exception handlers actually do something useful. We 
know software managers who melt down when they see a programmer write something like this: 

try { 

callBadMethod(); 

} catch (Exception ex) { } 

Notice anything missing? Dont eat the exception by catching it without actually handling it. You 
wont even be able to tell that the exception occurred because youll never see the stack trace. 


Rethrowing the Same Exception 

Just as you can throw a new exception from a catch clause, you can also throw the same exception you 
just caught. Heres a catch clause that does this: 


catch(IOException e) { 

// Do things, then if you decide you can't handle it... 
throw e; 

} 

All other catch clauses associated with the same t ry are ignored; if a finally block exists, it runs, 
and the exception is thrown back to the calling method (the next method down the call stack). If you throw 
a checked exception from a catch clause, you must also declare that exception! In other words, you must 
handle and declare, as opposed to handle or declare. The following example is illegal: 

public void doStuffO { 
try { 

// risky 10 things 
} catch(IOException ex) { 

// can't handle it 

throw ex; // Can't throw it unless you declare it 

} 

} 

In the preceding code, the dost uff () method is clearly able to throw a checked exceptionin this case 
an lOException so the compiler says, Well, thats just peachy that you have a t ry/catch in there, but 
its not good enough. If you might rethrow the lOException you catch, then you must declare it (in the 
method signature)! 


EXERCISE 5-4 


Creating an Exception 

In this exercise, we attempt to create a custom exception. We wont put in any new methods (it will have 
only those inherited from Exception); and because it extends Exception, the compiler considers it a 
checked exception. The goal of the program is to determine whether a command-line argument 
representing a particular food (as a string) is considered bad or okay. 

1. Lets first create our exception. We will call it BadFoodException. This exception will be 
thrown when a bad food is encountered. 

2. Create an enclosing class called MyException and a main( ) method, which will remain 
empty for now. 

3. Create a method called checkFood (). It takes a string argument and throws our exception if 
it doesnt like the food it was given. Otherwise, it tells us it likes the food. You can add any foods 
you arent particularly fond of to the list. 

4. Now in the main () method, youll get the command-line argument out of the string array and 
then pass that string on to the checkFood ( ) method. Because its a checked exception, the 
checkFood () method must declare it, and the main( ) method must handle it (using a try/catch). 
Do not have main () declare the exception, because if main () ducks the exception, who else is back 
there to catch it? (Actually, main ( ) can legally declare exceptions, but dont do that in this 
exercise.) 

As nifty as exception handling is, its still up to the developer to make proper use of it. Exception 
handling makes organizing code and signaling problems easy, but the exception handlers still have to be 




written. Youll find that even the most complex situations can be handled, and your code will be reusable, 
readable, and maintainable. 


6 


* 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Common Exceptions and Errors (OCA Objective 8.5) 

8.5 Recognize common exception classes (such as NullPointerException, ArithmeticException, 
ArraylndexOutOfBoundsExcepdon, ClassCastException) (sic) 

The intention of this objective is to make sure that you are familiar with some of the most common 
exceptions and errors youll encounter as a Java programmer. 



 a t c h 


The questions from this section are likely to be along the lines of, "Heres some code that just 
did something bad, which exception will be thrown?" Throughout the exam, questions will 
present some code and ask you to determine whether the code will run or whether an exception 
will be thrown. Since these questions are so common, understanding the causes for these 
exceptions is critical to your success. 


This is another one of those objectives that will turn up all through the real exam (does An exception 
is thrown at runtime ring a bell?), so make sure this section gets a lot of your attention. 


Where Exceptions Come From 

Jump back a page and take a look at the last sentence. Its important that you understand what causes 
exceptions and errors and where they come from. For the purposes of exam preparation, lets define two 
broad categories of exceptions and errors: 

I; JVM exceptions Those exceptions or errors that are either exclusively or most logically 
thrown by the JVM 

Programmatic exceptions Those exceptions that are thrown explicidy by application and/or 
API programmers 

JVM-Thrown Exceptions 

Lets start with a very common exception, the NullPointerException. As we saw in earlier chapters, 
this exception occurs when you attempt to access an object using a reference variable with a current value 
of null. Theres no way that the compiler can hope to find these problems before runtime. Take a look at 
the following: 






class NPE { 

static String s; 

public static void main(String [] args) { 

System.out.printIn(s.length()); 

} 

} 

Surely, the compiler can find the problem with that tiny little program! Nope, youre on your own. The 
code will compile just fine, and the JVM will throw a NullPointerException when it tries to invoke 
the length( ) method. 

Earlier in this chapter we discussed the call stack. As you recall, we used the convention that main () 
would be at the bottom of the call stack, and that as main ( ) invokes another method, and that method 
invokes another, and so on, the stack grows upward. Of course, the stack resides in memory, and even if 
your OS gives you a gigabyte of RAM for your program, its still a finite amount. Its possible to grow the 
stack so large that the OS runs out of space to store the call stack. When this happens, you get (wait for 
it...) a stackOverflowError. The most common way for this to occur is to create a recursive method. A 
recursive method invokes itself in the method body. Although that may sound weird, its a very common 
and useful technique for such things as searching and sorting algorithms. Take a look at this code: 

void go() { // recursion gone bad 

go () ; 

} 

As you can see, if you ever make the mistake of invoking the go () method, your program will fall into a 
black hole go () invoking go () invoking go () , until, no matter how much memory you have, youll get a 
StackOverflowError. Again, only the JVM knows when this moment occurs, and the JVM will be the 
source of this error. 


Programmatically Thrown Exceptions 

Now lets look at programmatically thrown exceptions. Remember we defined programmatically as 
meaning something like this: 

Created by an application and/or API developer 

For instance, many classes in the Java API have methods that take string arguments and convert these 
strings into numeric primitives. A good example of these classes is the so-called wrapper classes that 
we will study in Chapter 6. Even though we havent talked much about wrapper classes yet, the following 
example should make sense. 

At some point long ago, some programmer wrote the j ava. lang. Integer class and created methods 
like parselnt () and valueOf (). That programmer wisely decided that if one of these methods was 
passed a string that could not be converted into a number, the method should throw a 
NumberFormatException. The partially implemented code might look something like this: 

int parselnt(String s) throws NumberFormatException { 
boolean parseSuccess = false; 
int result = 0; 

// do complicated parsing 

if (IparseSuccess) // if the parsing failed 
throw new NumberFormatException(); 
return result; 


} 



Other examples of programmatic exceptions include an AssertionError (okay, its not an exception, 
but it IS thrown programmatically) and throwing an HlegalArgumentException. In fact, our mythical 
API developer could have used HlegalArgumentException for her parselnt () method. But it turns 
out that NumberFormatException extends IllegalArgumentException and is a little more precise, so 
in this case, using NumberFormatException supports the notion we discussed earlier: that when you 
have an exception hierarchy, you should use the most precise exception that you can. 

Of course, as we discussed earlier, you can also make up your very own special custom exceptions 
and throw them whenever you want to. These homemade exceptions also fall into the category of 
programmatically thrown exceptions. 


A Summary of the Exams Exceptions and Errors 

OCA 8 Objective 8.5 lists a few specific exceptions and errors; it says Recognize common exception 
classes (such as....). Table 5-2 summarizes the ten exceptions and errors that are most likely a part of the 
OCA 8 exam. 


TABLE 5-2 


Descriptions and Sources of Common Exceptions 



Exception 

Description 

Typically Thrown 

ArraylndexQutOfBoundsException 
(this chapter) 

Thrown when attempting to access 
an array with an invalid index value 
(either negative or beyond the 
length of the array). 

By the JVM 

ClassCastException 
(Chapter 2) 

Thrown when attempting to cast a 
reference variable to a type that fails 
the IS-A test. 

By the JVM 

I1legalArgumentException 

Thrown when a method receives an 
argument formatted differently than 
the method expects. 

Programmatically 

IllegalStateException 

Thrown when the state of the 
environment doesn't match the 
operation being attemptedfor 
example, using a scanner that's been 
closed. 

Programmatically 

NullPointerException 
(Chapter 3) 

Thrown when attempting to invoke 
a method on, or access a property 
from, a reference variable whose 
current value is null. 

By the JVM 

NumberFormatException 
(this chapter) 

Thrown when a method that 
converts a String to a number 
receives a String that it cannot 
convert. 

Programmatically 

ArithmeticException 

Thrown when an illegal math 
operation (such as dividing by zero) 
is attempted. 

By the JVM 

ExceptionlnlnitializerError 
(Chapter 2) 

Thrown when attempting to 
initialize a static variable or an 
initialization block. 

By the JVM 

stackOverflowError 
(this chapter) 

Typically thrown when a method 
recurses too deeply. (Each 
invocation is added to the stack.) 

By the JVM 

NoClassDefFoundError 

Thrown when the JVM can't 
find a class it needs, because of a 
command-line error, a classpath 
issue, or a missing . class file. 

By the JVM 


CERTIFICATION SUMMARY 

This chapter covered a lot of ground, all of which involved ways of controlling your program flow based 
on a conditional test. First, you learned about if and switch statements. The if statement evaluates one 
















or more expressions to a boolean result. If the result is true, the program will execute the code in the 
block that is encompassed by the if. If an else statement is used and the if expression evaluates to 
false, then the code following the else will be performed. If no else block is defined, then none of the 
code associated with the if statement will execute. 

You also learned that the switch statement can be used to replace multiple 
if - else statements. The switch statement can evaluate integer primitive types that can be implicidy cast 
to an int (those types are byte, short, int, and char); or it can evaluate enums; and as of Java 7, it can 
evaluate Strings. At runtime, the JVM will try to find a match between the expression in the switch 
statement and a constant in a corresponding case statement. If a match is found, execution will begin at 
the matching case and continue on from there, executing code in all the remaining case statements until a 
break statement is found or the end of the switch statement occurs. If there is no match, then the default 
case will execute, if there is one. 

Youve learned about the three looping constructs available in the Java language. These constructs are 
the for loop (including the basic for and the enhanced for, which was new to Java 5), the while loop, 
and the do loop. In general, the for loop is used when you know how many times you need to go through 
the loop. The while loop is used when you do not know how many times you want to go through, whereas 
the do loop is used when you need to go through at least once. In the for loop and the while loop, the 
expression has to evaluate to true to get inside the block and will check after every iteration of the loop. 
The do loop does not check the condition until after it has gone through the loop once. The major benefit 
of the for loop is the ability to initialize one or more variables and increment or decrement those 
variables in the for loop definition. 

The break and continue statements can be used in either a labeled or unlabeled fashion. When 
unlabeled, the break statement will force the program to stop processing the innermost looping construct 
and start with the line of code following the loop. Using an unlabeled continue command will cause the 
program to stop execution of the current iteration of the innermost loop and proceed with the next 
iteration. When abreakoracontinue statement is used in a labeled manner, it will perform in the same 
way, with one exception: the statement will not apply to the innermost loop; instead, it will apply to the 
loop with the label. The break statement is used most often in conjunction with the switch statement. 
When there is a match between the switch expression and the case constant, the code following the case 
constant will be performed. To stop execution, a break is needed. 

Youve seen how Java provides an elegant mechanism in exception handling. Exception handling 
allows you to isolate your error-correction code into separate blocks so the main code doesnt become 
cluttered by error-checking code. Another elegant feature allows you to handle similar errors with a 
single error-handling block, without code duplication. Also, the error handling can be deferred to 
methods further back on the call stack. 

You learned that Javas try keyword is used to specify a guarded regiona block of code in which 
problems might be detected. An exception handler is the code that is executed when an exception occurs. 
The handler is defined by using Javas catch keyword. All catch clauses must immediately follow the 
related try block. 

Java also provides the finally keyword. This is used to define a block of code that is always 
executed, either immediately after a catch clause completes or immediately after the associated try 
block in the case that no exception was thrown (or there was a try but no catch). Use finally blocks to 
release system resources and to perform any cleanup required by the code in the t ry block. A finally 
block is not required, but if there is one, it must immediately follow the last catch. (If there is no catch 
block, the finally block must immediately follow the t ry block.) Its guaranteed to be called except 
when the try or catch issues a System. exit(). 



An exception object is an instance of class Exception or one of its subclasses. The catch clause 
takes, as a parameter, an instance of an object of a type derived from the Exception class. Java requires 
that each method either catches any checked exception it can throw or else declares that it throws the 
exception. The exception declaration is part of the methods signature. To declare that an exception may 
be thrown, the throws keyword is used in a method definition, along with a list of all checked exceptions 
that might be thrown. 

Runtime exceptions are of type RuntimeException (or one of its subclasses). These exceptions are a 
special case because they do not need to be handled or declared, and thus are known as unchecked 
exceptions. Errors are of type j ava. lang .Error or its subclasses, and like runtime exceptions, they do 
not need to be handled or declared. Checked exceptions include any exception types that are not of type 
RuntimeException or Error. If your code fails either to handle a checked exception or declare that it is 
thrown, your code wont compile. But with unchecked exceptions or objects of type Error, it doesnt 
matter to the compiler whether you declare them or handle them, do nothing about them, or do some 
combination of declaring and handling. In other words, youre free to declare them and handle them, but 
the compiler wont care one way or the other. Its not good practice to handle an Error, though, because 
you can rarely recover from one. 

Finally, remember that exceptions can be generated by the JVM or by a programmer. 


/ TWO-MINUTE DRILL 

Here are some of the key points from each certification objective in this chapter. You might want to loop 
through them several times. 

Writing Code Using if and switch Statements (OCA Objectives 3.3 and 3.4) 

? The only legal expression in an if statement isaboolean expressionin other words, an 
expression that resolves to a boolean or a Boolean reference. 

? Watch out for boolean assignments (=) that can be mistaken for boolean equality (==) tests: 

boolean x = false; 

if (x = true) { } // an assignment, so x will always be true! 

? Curly braces are optional for if blocks that have only one conditional statement. But watch 
out for misleading indentations. 

? switch statements can evaluate only to enums or the byte, short, int, char, and, as of Java 
7, string data types. You cant say this: 

long s = 30; 
switch(s) { } 

? The case constant must be a literal or a compile-time constant, including an enum or a 
String. You cannot have a case that includes a nonfinal variable or a range of values. 

? If the condition in a switch statement matches a case constant, execution will run through all 
code in the switch following the matching case statement until a break statement or the end of the 
switch statement is encountered. In other words, the matching case is just the entry point into the 
case block, but unless theres a break statement, the matching case is not the only case code that 
runs. 


? The default keyword should be used in a switch statement if you want to run some code 
when none of the case values match the conditional value. 

? The default block can be located anywhere in the switch block, so if no preceding case 
matches, the default block will be entered; if the default does not contain a break, then code 
will continue to execute (fall-through) to the end of the switch or until the break statement is 
encountered. 

Writing Code Using Loops (OCA Objectives 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4) 

? A basic for statement has three parts: declaration and/or initialization, boolean evaluation, 
and the iteration expression. 

? If a variable is incremented or evaluated within a basic for loop, it must be declared before 
the loop or within the for loop declaration. 

? A variable declared (not just initialized) within the basic for loop declaration cannot be 
accessed outside the for loopin other words, code below the for loop wont be able to use the 
variable. 

? You can initialize more than one variable of the same type in the first part of the basic for 
loop declaration; each initialization must be comma separated. 

? An enhanced for statement (new as of Java 5) has two parts: the declaration and the 
expression. It is used only to loop through arrays or collections. 

? With an enhanced for, the expression is the array or collection through which you want to 
loop. 

? With an enhanced for, the declaration is the block variable, whose type is compatible with 
the elements of the array or collection, and that variable contains the value of the element for the 
given iteration. 

? Unlike with C, you cannot use a number or anything that does not evaluate toaboolean value 
as a condition for an if statement or looping construct. You cant, for example, say if (x), unless x 
is a boolean variable. 

? The do loop will always enter the body of the loop at least once. 

Using break and continue (OCA Objective 5.5) 

? An unlabeled break statement will cause the current iteration of the innermost loop to stop 
and the line of code following the loop to run. 

? An unlabeled continue statement will cause the current iteration of the innermost loop to 
stop, the condition of that loop to be checked, and if the condition is met, the loop to run again. 

? If the break statement or the continue statement is labeled, it will cause 
a similar action to occur on the labeled loop, not the innermost loop. 

Handling Exceptions (OCA Objectives 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.4, and 8.5) 

? Some of the benefits of Javas exception-handling features include organized error-handling 
code, easy error detection, keeping exception-handling code separate from other code, and the 
ability to reuse exception-handling code for a range of issues. 


? Exceptions come in two flavors: checked and unchecked. 

? Checked exceptions include all subtypes of Exception, excluding classes that extend 
RuntimeException. 

? Checked exceptions are subject to the handle or declare rule; any method that might throw a 
checked exception (including methods that invoke methods that can throw a checked exception) 
must either declare the exception using throws or handle the exception with an appropriate 
try/catch. 

? Subtypes of Error or RuntimeException are unchecked, so the compiler doesnt enforce the 
handle or declare rule. Youre free to handle them or to declare them, but the compiler doesnt care 
one way or the other. 

? A finally block will always be invoked, regardless of whether an exception is thrown or 
caught in its try/catch. 

? The only exception to the f inally-will-always-be-called rule is that a finally will not be 
invoked if the JVM shuts down. That could happen if code from the try or catch blocks calls 
System .exit(). 

? Just because finally is invoked does not mean it will complete. Code in the finally block 
could itself raise an exception or issue a System. exit (). 

? Uncaught exceptions propagate back through the call stack, starting from the method where the 
exception is thrown and ending with either the first method that has a corresponding catch for that 
exception type or a JVM shutdown (which happens if the exception gets to main () and main ( ) is 
ducking the exception by declaring it). 

? You can almost always create your own exceptions by extending Exception or one of its 
checked exception subtypes. Such an exception will then be considered a checked exception by the 
compiler. (In other words, its rare to extend RuntimeException.) 

? All catch blocks must be ordered from most specific to most general. If you have a catch 
clause for both lOException and Exception, you must put the catch for lOException first in 
your code. Otherwise, the lOException would be caught by catch (Exception e), because a 
catch argument can catch the specified exception or any of its subtypes! 

? Some exceptions are created by programmers and some by the JVM. 

SELF TEST 

1. Given that toLowerCase( ) is an apdy named string method that returns a String, and given 
the code: 


public class Flipper { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
String o = "-"; 
switch("RED".toLowerCase()) { 

case "yellow": 

o += "y"; 
case "red": 

o += "r"; 
case "green": 
o += "g"; 

} 

System.out.println(o); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. - 

B. -r 

C. -rg 

D. Compilation fails 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 
2. Given: 

class Plane { 

static String s = "-"; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
new Plane() .si () ; 

System.out.println(s); 

} 

void si() { 

try { s2(); } 

catch (Exception e) { s += "c"; } 

} 

void s2() throws Exception { 

S3 () ; S += "2"; 
s3 () ; s += "2b"; 

} 

void s3() throws Exception { 
throw new Exception(); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. - 

B. -c 

C. -c2 

D. -2c 

E. -c22b 

F. -2c2b 

G. -2c2bc 


H. Compilation fails 

3. Given: 

try { int x = Integer.parseInt("two"); } 

Which could be used to create an appropriate catch block? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. ClassCastException 

B. IllegalStateException 

C. NumberFormatException 

D. IllegalArgumentException 

E. ExceptionlnlnitializerError 

F. ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException 

4. Given: 

public class Flip2 { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

String o = " 

String [] sa = new String [4] ; 
for(int i = 0; i < args.length; i++) 
sa [i] = args [i] ; 
for(String n: sa) { 

switch(n.toLowerCase()) { 

case "yellow": o += "y"; 

case "red": o += "r"; 

case "green": o += "g"; 

} 

} 

System.out.print(o); 

} 

} 

And given the command-line invocation: 

Java Flip2 RED Green YeLLow 

Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. The string rgy will appear somewhere in the output 

B. The string rgg will appear somewhere in the output 

C. The string gyr will appear somewhere in the output 

D. Compilation fails 

E. An exception is thrown at runtime 

5. Given: 

I. class Loopy { 

2. public static void main(String[] args) { 

3. int[] x = {7,6 ( 5,4,3,2 ( l}; 

4. // insert code here 

5. System.out.print(y + " "); 

6 . 

7- } 

8 . } 


} 


Which, inserted independently at line 4, compiles? (Choose all that apply.) 


A. 

for 

(int 

y : 

x) { 





B. 

for 

(x : 

int 

y) { 





C. 

int 

y = 

0; 

for(y : 

x) 

{ 



D. 

for 

(int 

y=o 

, z = 0; 

z<x 

.length; z++) 

{ y - 

x [z] ; 

E. 

for 

(int 

y=o 

, int z 

= 0; 

z<x.length; z 

++) { 

y = X[z] ; 

F. 

int 

y = 

0; 

for(int 

z= 

0; z<x.length; 

Z + + ) 

{ y = x [ z ] ; 


6. Given: 

class Emu { 

static String s = "- M ; 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
try { 

throw new Exception(); 

} catch (Exception e) { 
try { 

try { throw new ExceptionO; 

} catch (Exception ex) { s += "ic "; } 

throw new ExceptionO; } 
catch (Exception x) { s += "me "; } 

finally { s += "mf "; } 

} finally { s += "of } 

System.out.printIn(s); 

} } 

What is the result? 

A. -ic of 

B. -mf of 

C. -me mf 

D. -ic mf of 

E. -ic me mf of 

F. -ic me of mf 

G. Compilation fails 

7. Given: 

3. class SubException extends Exception { } 

4. class SubSubException extends SubException { } 

5 . 

6. public class CC { void doStuffO throws SubException { } } 

7 . 

8. class CC2 extends CC { void doStuffO throws SubSubException { } } 
9 . 

10. class CC3 extends CC { void doStuffO throws Exception { } } 

11. 

12. class CC4 extends CC { void doStuff(int x) throws Exception { } } 

13 . 

14. class CC5 extends CC { void doStuffO { } } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 


A. Compilation succeeds 

B. Compilation fails due to an error on line 8 

C. Compilation fails due to an error on line 10 

D. Compilation fails due to an error on line 12 

E. Compilation fails due to an error on line 14 


8. Given: 


3 . 

public class Ebb { 

4 . 

static int x 

= 7; 

5 . 

public static 

void main (String [] . 

6 . 

String s = 

II II . 

/ 

7 . 

8 . 

for(int y = 

X++ ; 

0; y < 3; y++) { 

9 . 

switch(x) 

{ 

10 . 

case 8: 

s += "8 " ; 

11. 

case 9: 

S += "9 

12 . 

case 10 

: { s+= "10 break 

13 . 

default 

: S += "d 

14 . 

15 . 

16 . 

case 13 

} 

} 

: S+= "13 

17 . 

18 . 

System.out. 

} 

printIn(s); 

19 . 

20 . 

static { x++; 

} 

} 


What is the result? 

A. 9 10 d 

B. 8 9 10 d 

C. 9 10 10 d 

D. 9 10 10 d 13 

E. 8 9 10 10 d 13 

F. 8 9 10 9 10 10 d 13 


{ 


G. Compilation fails 
9. Given: 



3. class Infinity { } 

4. public class Beyond extends Infinity { 


5 . 

static Integer 

i; 

6 . 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

7 . 

int sw = (int 

:) (Math, random () * 3) ; 

8 . 

switch(sw) { 


9 . 

case 0: { 

for(int x = 10; x > 5; x+ + ) 

10 . 


if (X > 10000000) X = 10; 

11. 


break; } 

12 . 

case 1: { 

int y = 7 * i; break; } 

13 . 

case 2: { 

Infinity inf = new Beyond(); 

14 . 


Beyond b = (Beyond)inf; } 


15. } 

16. } 

17. } 

And given that line 7 will assign the value 0, 1, or 2 to sw, which are true? (Choose all that 
apply.) 

A. Compilation fails 

B. AelassCastException might be thrown 

C. AstackOverf lowError might be thrown 

D. A NullPointerException might be thrown 

E. An IllegalStateException might be thrown 

F. The program might hang without ever completing 

G. The program will always complete without exception 
10. Given: 

3. public class Circles { 

4. public static void main(String[] args) { 

5. int [] ia = {l, 3,5,7,9}; 

6. for(int x : ia) { 

7. for(int j = 0; j < 3; j++) { 

8. if (x > 4 ScSc x < 8) continue; 

9. System.out.print(" " + x) ; 

10. if(j==l) break; 

11. continue; 

12 . } 

13. continue; 

14. } 

15. } 

16. } 

What is the result? 

A. l 3 9 

B. 5 5 7 7 

C. 1 3 3 9 9 

D. 1 1 3 3 9 9 

E. 111333999 

F. Compilation fails 


11 . Given: 


3 . 

public class OverAndOver { 




4 . 

static String s = " M ; 




5 . 

public static void main(String[] args) 

{ 

6 . 

try { 




7 . 

s += "1"; 




8 . 

throw new Exception( 

) ; 



9 . 

} catch (Exception e) 

{ s += "2", 

r 


10 . 

} finally { s + = "3"; 

doStuff(); 

S +: 

= " 4 " ; 

11. 

} 




12 . 

System.out.println(s); 




13 . 

} 




14 . 

static void doStuffO { 

int x = 0; 

int 

y = 7/x; 

15 . 

} 





What is the result? 

A. 12 

B. 13 

C. 123 

D. 1234 

E. Compilation fails 

F. 123 followed by an exception 

G. 1234 followed by an exception 

H. An exception is thrown with no other output 
12 . Given: 

3. public class Wind { 

4. public static void main(String[] args) { 

5. foreach: 

6. for(int j=0; j<5; j++) { 

7. for(int k=0; k< 3; k++) { 

8. System.out.print(" " + j); 

9. if(j==3 && k==l) break foreach; 

10. if (j= = 0 | | j= = 2) break; 

11 . } 

12 . } 

13. } 

14. } 

What is the result? 

A. e l 2 3 

B. l l l 3 3 

C. 0111233 

D. 11133444 

E. 0111233444 

F. Compilation fails 


13 . Given: 


3. public class Gotcha { 

4. public static void main(String[] args) { 

5. // insert code here 
6 . 

7 - } 

8. void go() { 

9. go(); 

10 . } 

11 . } 

And given the following three code fragments: 

I. new Gotcha().go(); 

II. try { new Gotcha().go(); } 

catch (Error e) { System.out.println("ouch"); } 

III. try { new Gotcha().go(); } 

catch (Exception e) { System.out.println("ouch"); } 

When fragments IIII are added, independently, at line 5, which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Some will not compile 

B. They will all compile 

C. All will complete normally 

D. None will complete normally 

E. Only one will complete normally 

F. Two of them will complete normally 

14 . Given the code snippet: 

String s = "bob"; 

String[] sa = {"a", "bob"}; 

final String s2 = "bob"; 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("bob"); 


// switch(sa[1]) { // line 1 
// switch("b" + "ob") { // line 2 
// switch(sb.toString()) { // line 3 


// case "ann": ; // line 4 

// case s: ; // line 5 

// case s2: ; // line 6 

} 

And given that the numbered lines will all be tested by uncommenting one switch statement and 
one case statement together, which line(s) will FAIL to compile? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. line 1 

B. line 2 

C. line 3 

D. line 4 

E. line 5 


F. line 6 


G. All six lines of code will compile 

15 . Given that lOException is in the j ava. io package and given: 

1. public class Frisbee { 

2. // insert code here 

3. int x = 0; 

4. System.out.println(7/x); 

5 - } 

6 . } 

And given the following four code fragments: 

I. public static void main(String[] args) { 

II. public static void main(String[] args) throws Exception { 

III. public static void main(String[] args) throws lOException { 

IV. public static void main(String[] args) throws RuntimeException { 

If the four fragments are inserted independendy at line 2, which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. All four will compile and execute without exception 

B. All four will compile and execute and throw an exception 

C. Some, but not all, will compile and execute without exception 

D. Some, but not all, will compile and execute and throw an exception 

E. When considering fragments II, III, and iy of those that will compile, adding a try/catch 
block around line 4 will cause compilation to fail 

16 . Given: 

2. class MyException extends Exception { } 

3. class Tire { 

4. void doStuffO { } 

5 - } 

6. public class Retread extends Tire { 

7. public static void main(String[] args) { 

8. new Retread().doStuff(); 

9 - 1 

10. // insert code here 

11. System.out.println(7/0); 

12 . } 

13. } 

And given the following four code fragments: 

I. void doStuffO { 

II. void doStuffO throws MyException { 

III. void doStuffO throws RuntimeException { 

IV. void doStuffO throws ArithmeticException { 

When fragments I-IV are added, independendy, at line 10, which are true? (Choose all that 
apply.) 

A. None will compile 

B. They will all compile 

C. Some, but not all, will compile 

D. All those that compile will throw an exception at runtime 


E. None of those that compile will throw an exception at runtime 

F. Only some of those that compile will throw an exception at runtime 

SELF TEST ANSWERS 

1. 0 C is correct. As of Java 7 its legal to switch on a String, and remember that switches use 
entry point logic. 

3 A, B, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.4) 

2. 0 B is correct. Once s3( ) throws the exception to s2(), s2( ) throws it to sl( ), and no more 
of s2( )s code will be executed. 

3 A, C, D, E, F, G, and H are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 8.2 and 8.4) 

3. 0 C and D are correct. Integer . parselnt can throw a NumberFormatException, and 
HlegalArgumentException is its superclass (that is, a broader exception). 

3 A, B, E, and F are not in NumberFormatExceptions class hierarchy. (OCA Objective 8.5) 

4. 0 E is correct. As of Java 7 the syntax is legal. The sa [ ] array receives only three arguments 
from the command line, so on the last iteration through sa[], a NullPointerException is thrown. 

3 A, B, C, and D are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 1.3, 5.2, and 8.5) 

5. 0 A, D, and F are correct. A is an example of the enhanced for loop. D and F are examples 
of the basic for loop. 

3 B, C, and E are incorrect. B is incorrect because its operands are swapped. C is incorrect 
because the enhanced for must declare its first operand. E is incorrect syntax to declare two 
variables in a for statement. (OCA Objective 5.2) 

6. 0 E is correct. There is no problem nesting try/catch blocks. As is normal, when an 
exception is thrown, the code in the catch block runs, and then the code in the finally block runs. 

3 A, B, C, D, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 8.2 and 8.4) 

7. 0 C is correct. An overriding method cannot throw a broader exception than the method its 
overriding. Class CC4s method is an overload, not an override. 

3 A, B, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 8.2 and 8.4) 

8. 0 D is correct. Did you catch the static initializer block? Remember that switches work on 
fall-through logic and that fall-through logic also applies to the default case, which is used when 
no other case matches. 

3 A, B, C, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.4) 

9. 0 D and F are correct. Because i was not initialized, case 1 will throw a 
NullPointerException. Case 0 will initiate an endless loop, not a stack overflow. Case 2s 
downcast will not cause an exception. 

3 A, B, C, E, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 3.4 and 8.5) 

10. 0 D is correct. The basic rule for unlabeled continue statements is that the current iteration 


stops early and execution jumps to the next iteration. The last two continue statements are 
redundant! 

3 A, B, C, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 5.2 and 5.5) 

11. 0 H is correct. Its true that the value of string s is 123 at the time that the divide-by-zero 
exception is thrown, but f inally () is not guaranteed to complete, and in this case f inally () 
never completes, so the System . out. println (S.O.P) never executes. 

3 A, B, C, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 8.2 and 8.5) 

12. 0 C is correct. A break breaks out of the current innermost loop and carries on. A labeled 
break breaks out of and terminates the labeled loops. 

3 A, B, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 5.2 and 5.5) 

13. 0 B and E are correct. First off, go( ) is a badly designed recursive method, guaranteed to 
cause a stackOverflowError. Since Exception is not a superclass of Error, catching an 
Exception will not help handle an Error, so fragment III will not complete normally. Only 
fragment II will catch the E r r o r. 

IS A, C, D, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 8.1, 8.2, and 8.4) 

14. 0 E is correct. A switchs cases must be compile-time constants or enum values. 

3 A, B, C, D, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 3.4) 

15. 0 D is correct. This is kind of sneaky, but remember that were trying to toughen you up for 
the real exam. If youre going to throw an lOException, you have to import the java.io package or 
declare the exception with a fully qualified name. 

3 A, B, C, and E are incorrect. A, B, and C are incorrect based on the above. E is incorrect 
because its okay both to handle and declare an exception. (OCA Objectives 8.2 and 8.5) 

16. 0 C and D are correct. An overriding method cannot throw checked exceptions that are 
broader than those thrown by the overridden method. However, an overriding method can throw 
RuntimeExceptions not thrown by the overridden method. 

3 A, B, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 8.1) 




6 

Strings, Arrays, ArrayLists, Dates, and Lambdas 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVES 


 Create and Manipulate Strings 

 Manipulate Data Using the StringBuilder Class and Its Methods 

 Create and Use Calendar Data 

 Declare, Instantiate, Initialize, and Use a One-Dimensional Array 

 Declare, Instantiate, Initialize, and Use a Multidimensional Array 

 Declare and Use an ArrayList 

 Use Wrapper Classes 

 Use Encapsulation for Reference Variables 

 Use Simple Lambda Expressions 

/ Two-Minute Drill 
Q&A Self Test 


T his chapter focuses on the exam objectives related to searching, formatting, and parsing strings; 
creating and using calendar-related objects; creating and using arrays and ArrayLists; and 
using simple lambda expressions. Many of these topics could fill an entire book. Fortunately, 
you wont have to become a total guru to do well on the exam The exam team intended to 
include just the basic aspects of these technologies, and in this chapter, we cover more than youll need to 
get through the related objectives on the exam 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Using String and StringBuilder (OCA Objectives 9.2 and 
9.1) 

9.2 Creating and manipulating Strings. 

9.1 Manipulate data using the StringBuilder class and its methods. 

Everything you needed to know about strings in the older OCJP exams youll need to know for the 
OCA8 exam Closely related to the string class are the StringBuilder class and the almost identical 
StringBuffer class. (For the exam, the only thing you need to know about the stringBuffer class is 
that it has exacdythe same methods as the StringBuilder class, but StringBuilder is faster because 





its methods arent synchronized.) Both classes, StringBuilder and StringBuffer, give you St ring 
like objects and ways to manipulate them, with the important difference being that these objects are 
mutable. 


The String Class 

This section covers the string class, and the key concept for you to understand is that once a string 
object is created, it can never be changed. So, then, what is happening when a string object seems to be 
changing? Lets find out. 

Strings Are Immutable Objects 

Well start with a little background information about strings. You may not need this for the test, but a 
little context will help. Handling "strings" of characters is a fundamental aspect of most programming 
languages. In Java, each character in a string is a 16-bit Unicode character. Because Unicode characters 
are 16 bits (not the skimpy 7 or 8 bits that ASCII provides), a rich, international set of characters is easily 
represented in Unicode. 

In Java, strings are objects. As with other objects, you can create an instance of a string with the new 
keyword, as follows: 

String s = new String(); 

This line of code creates a new object of class string and assigns it to the reference variable s. 

So far, string objects seem just like other objects. Now, lets give the string a value: 

s = "abcdef"; 

(As youll find out shordy, these two lines of code arent quite what they seem, so stay tuned.) 

It turns out the String class has about a zillion constructors, so you can use a more efficient shortcut: 

String s = new String("abcdef"); 

And this is even more concise: 

String s = "abcdef"; 

There are some subde differences between these options that well discuss later, but what they have in 
common is that they all create a new string object, with a value of "abcdef", and assign it to a 
reference variable s. Now lets say you want a second reference to the string object referred to by s: 

String s2 = s; // refer s2 to the same String as s 

So far so good, string objects seem to be behaving just like other objects, so whats all the fuss 
about? Immutability! (What the heck is immutability?) Once you have assigned astringa value, that 
value can never changeits immutable, frozen solid, wont budge, fini, done. (Well talk about why 
later; dont let us forget.) The good news is that although the St ring object is immutable, its reference 
variable is not, so to continue with our previous example, consider this: 

s = s.concat(" more stuff"); // the concat() method 'appends' 

// a literal to the end 

Now, wait just a minute, didnt we just say that string objects were immutable? So whats all this 



"appending to the end of the string" talk? Excellent question: lets look at what really happened. 

The Java Virtual Machine (JVM) took the value of string s (which was "abcdef ") and tacked " more 
stuff" onto the end, giving us the value "abcdef more stuff". Since strings are immutable, the JVM 
couldnt stuff this new value into the old string referenced by s, so it created a new string object, gave 
it the value "abcdef more stuff", and made s refer to it. At this point in our example, we have two 
String objects: the first one we created, with the value "abcdef", and the second one with the value 
"abcdef more stuff". Technically there are now three string objects, because the literal argument to 
concat, " more stuff", is itself a new string object. But we have references only to "abcdef" 
(referenced by s2) and "abcdef more stuff " (referenced by s). 

What if we didnt have the foresight or luck to create a second reference variable for the "abcdef" 
string before we called s = s. concat (" more stuf f "); ? In that case, the original, unchanged string 
containing "abcdef" would still exist in memory, but it would be considered "lost." No code in our 
program has any way to reference itit is lost to us. Note, however, that the original "abcdef" string 
didnt change (it cant, remember; its immutable); only the reference variable s was changed so that it 
would refer to a different string. 

Figure 6-1 shows what happens on the heap when you reassign a reference variable. Note that the 
dashed line indicates a deleted reference. 


Step I: String s = "abc" ; 


The heap 



String reference 
variable 


Step 3: 



String reference 
variable 


FIGURE 6-1 


String objects and their reference variables 


To review our first example: 

// create a new String object, with 
// value "abcdef", refer s to it 
// create a 2nd reference variable 
// referring to the same String 

// create a new String object, with value "abcdef more stuff", 
// refer s to it. (Change s's reference from the old String 
// to the new String.) (Remember s2 is still referring to 
// the original "abcdef" String.) 

s = s.concat(" more stuff"); 


String s = "abcdef"; 
String s2 = s; 


Lets look at another example: 




















String x = "Java"; 
x.concat(" Rules!"); 

System.out.println("x = " + x); // the output is "x = Java" 

The first line is straightforward: Create a new string object, give it the value "Java", and refer x to it. 
Next the JVM creates a second string object with the value "Java Rules ! " but nothing refers to it. The 
second string object is instandy lost; you cant get to it. The reference variable x still refers to the 
original string with the value "Java". Figure 6-2 shows creating a string without assigning a 
reference to it. 




variable 


Notice that no reference 
variable is created to access 
the "Java Rules!" String. 


FIGURE 6-2 


A St ring object is abandoned upon creation. 


Lets expand this current example. We started with 

String x = "Java"; 
x.concat(" Rules!"); 

System.out.println("x = M + x); // the output is: x = Java 


Now lets add 
















x.toUpperCase(); 

System.out.println("x = " + x); // the output is still: 

/ / x = Java 

(We actually did just create a new string object with the value "JAVA", but it was lost, and x still 
refers to the original unchanged string "Java".) How about adding this: 

x.replace ( 'a', 'X') ; 

System.out.println("x = " + x); // the output is still: x = Java 

Can you determine what happened? The JVM created yet another new string object, with the value 
" JXvX", (replacing the as with xs), but once again this new string was lost, leaving x to refer to the 
original unchanged and unchangeable string object, with the value "Java". In all these cases, we called 
various string methods to create a new St ring by altering an existing string, but we never assigned the 
newly created string to a reference variable. 

But we can put a small spin on the previous example: 

String x = "Java"; 

x = x.concat(" Rules!"); // assign new string to x 

System.out.println("x = " + x); // output: x = Java Rules! 

This time, when the JVM runs the second line, a new string object is created with the value "Java 
Rules !", and x is set to reference it. But wait...theres morenow the original string object, "Java", 
has been lost, and no one is referring to it. So in both examples, we created two string objects and only 
one reference variable, so one of the two string objects was left out in the cold. (See Figure 6-3 for a 
graphic depiction of this sad story.) 



Step I: String x = "Java" ; 


The heap 


x - 

String reference 
variable 



String object 


Step 2: 



Notice in step 2 that there is no 
valid reference to the "Java" String; 
that object has been "abandoned" 
and a new object created. 


FIGURE 6-3 


An old string object being abandoned. The dashed line indicates a deleted reference. 


Lets take this example a little further: 

String x = "Java"; 
x = x.concat (" Rules!"); 

System.out.printIn("x = " + x); 

x.toLowerCase(); 

System.out.printIn("x = " + x); 

x = x.toLowerCase(); 

System.out.printIn("x = " + x); 


// output: x = Java Rules! 

// no assignment, create a 
// new, abandoned String 

// no assignment, the output 
// is still: x = Java Rules! 

// create a new String, 

// assigned to x 

// the assignment causes the 

// output: x = java rules! 














The preceding discussion contains the keys to understanding Java string immutability. If you really, 
really get the examples and diagrams, backward and forward, you should get 80 percent of the St ring 
questions on the exam correct. 

We will cover more details about strings next, but make no mistakein terms of bang for your buck, 
what weve already covered is by far the most important part of understanding how string objects work 
in Java. 

Well finish this section by presenting an example of the kind of devilish string question you might 
expect to see on the exam. Take the time to work it out on paper. (Hint: try to keep track of how many 
objects and reference variables there are, and which ones refer to which.) 

String si = "spring "; 

String s2 = si + "summer "; 
si.concat("fall "); 
s2.concat(si); 
si += "winter "; 

System.out.println(si + " " + s2); 

What is the output? For extra credit, how many string objects and how many reference variables 
were created prior to the println statement? 

Answer: The result of this code fragment is spring winter spring summer. There are two reference 
variables: si and s2. Atotal of eight String objects were created as follows: "spring ", "summer " 
(lost), "spring summer ", "fall " (lost), "spring fall " (lost), "spring summer spring " (lost), 
"winter " (lost), "spring winter " (at this point "spring " is lost). Only two of the eight String 
objects are not lost in this process. 


Important Facts About Strings and Memory 

In this section, well discuss how Java handles string objects in memory and some of the reasons 
behind these behaviors. 

One of the key goals of any good programming language is to make efficient use of memory. As an 
application grows, its very common for string literals to occupy large amounts of a programs memory, 
and there is often a lot of redundancy within the universe of string literals for a program. To make Java 
more memory efficient, the JVM sets aside a special area of memory called the String constant pool. 
When the compiler encounters a string literal, it checks the pool to see if an identical string already 
exists. If a match is found, the reference to the new literal is directed to the existing string, and no new 
String literal object is created. (The existing string simply has an additional reference.) Now you can 
start to see why making string objects immutable is such a good idea. If several reference variables 
refer to the same string without even knowing it, it would be very bad if any of them could change the 
Strings value. 

You might say, "Well thats all well and good, but what if someone overrides the string class 
functionality; couldnt that cause problems in the pool?" Thats one of the main reasons that the string 
class is marked final. Nobody can override the behaviors of any of the string methods, so you can rest 
assured that the string objects you are counting on to be immutable will, in fact, be immutable. 

Creating New Strings 

Earlier we promised to talk more about the subde differences between the various methods of creating a 
String. Lets look at a couple of examples of how a string might be created, and lets further assume 



that no other string objects exist in the pool. In this simple case, "abc" will go in the pool, and s will 
refer to it: 

String s = "abc"; // creates one String object and one 

// reference variable 

In the next case, because we used the new keyword, Java will create a new string object in normal 
(nonpool) memory, and s will refer to it. In addition, the literal "abc" will be placed in the pool: 

String s = new String("abc"); // creates two objects, 

// and one reference variable 

Important Methods in the String Class 

The following methods are some of the more commonly used methods in the St ring class, and they are 
also the ones youre most likely to encounter on the exam. 

 charAt() Returns the character located at the specified index 

 concat() Appends one string to the end of another (+ also works) 

 equalsIgnoreCase() Determines the equality of two strings, ignoring case 

 length() Returns the number of characters in a string 

 replace() Replaces occurrences of a character with a new character 

 substring() Returns a part of a string 

 toLowerCase() Returns a string, with uppercase characters converted to lowercase 
toString() Returns the value of a string 

 toUpperCase() Returns a string, with lowercase characters converted to uppercase 
i trim() Removes whitespace from both ends of a string 

Lets look at these methods in more detail. 

public char charAt(int index) 

This method returns the character located at the Strings specified index. Remember, string indexes 
are zero-basedheres an example: 

String x = "airplane"; 

System.out.println( x.charAt(2) ); // output is 'r' 


public String concat(String s) 

This method returns a string with the value of the St ring passed in to the method appended to the end of 
the string used to invoke the methodheres an example: 

String x = "taxi"; 

System.out.println( x.concat(" cab") ); // output is "taxi cab" 

The overloaded + and += operators perform functions similar to the concat() methodheres an 
example: 


String x = "library"; 

System.out.printIn( x + " card"); // output is "library card" 

String x = "Atlantic"; 
x+= " ocean"; 

System.out.printIn( x ); // output is "Atlantic ocean" 

In the preceding "Atlantic ocean " example, notice that the value of x really did change! Remember 
the += operator is an assignment operator, so line 2 is really creating a new string, "Atlantic ocean", 
and assigning it to the x variable. After line 2 executes, the original string x was referring to, 
"Atlantic", is abandoned. 

public boolean equalsIgnoreCase(String s) 

This method returns a boolean value (true or false) depending on whether the value of the string in 
the argument is the same as the value of the String used to invoke the method. This method will return 
true even when characters in the string objects being compared have differing casesheres an 
example: 

String x = "Exit"; 

System.out.println( x.equalsIgnoreCase("EXIT")); // is "true" 

System.out.printIn( x.equalsIgnoreCase("tixe")); // is "false" 


public int length() 

This method returns the length of the string used to invoke the methodheres an example: 

String x = "01234567"; 

System, out .println ( x.lengthO ); // returns "8" 



 a t c h 


Arrays have an attribute (not a method) called length. You may encounter questions in the 
exam that attempt to use the length () method on an array or that attempt to use the length 
attribute on a string. Both cause compiler errors-consider these, for example: 

String x = "test"; 

System.out.println( x.length ); // compiler error 

and 

String [] x = new String [3] ; 

System.out.println( x.lengthO ); // compiler error 


public String replace(char old, char new) 

This method returns a String whose value is that of the String used to invoke the method, but updated 
so that any occurrence of the char in the first argument is replaced by the char in the second argument 




heres an example: 

String x = "oxoxoxox"; 

System.out.printIn( x.replace('x 1 , 'X') ); // output is " 0 X 0 X 0 X 0 X" 

public String substring(int begin) and public String substring(int begin, int end) 

The substring() method is used to return a part (or substring) of the String used to invoke the method. 
The first argument represents the starting location (zero-based) of the substring. If the call has only one 
argument, the substring returned will include the characters at the end of the original String. If the call 
has two arguments, the substring returned will end with the character located in the nth position of the 
original string where n is the second argument. Unfortunately, the ending argument is not zero-based, so 
if the second argument is 7, the last character in the returned string will be in the original Strings 7 
position, which is index 6 (ouch). Lets look at some examples: 

String x = "0123456789"; // as if by magic, the value of 

each 

// char is the same as its 

index! 

System.out.println( x.substring(5) ); // output is "56789" 

System.out.println( x.substring(5, 8)); // output is "567" 

The first example should be easy: start at index 5 and return the rest of the St ring. The second example 
should be read as follows: start at index 5 and return the characters up to and including the 8th position 
(index 7). 

public String toLowerCase() 

Converts all characters of a string to lowercaseheres an example: 

String x = "A New Moon"; 

System.out.println( x.toLowerCase() ); // output is "a new moon" 


public String toString() 

This method returns the value of the String used to invoke the method. What? Why would you need such 
a seemingly "do nothing" method? All objects in Java must have a tost ring () method, which typically 
returns a St ring that in some meaningful way describes the object in question. In the case ofastring 
object, whats a more meaningful way than the Strings value? For the sake of consistency, heres an 
example: 

String x = "big surprise"; 

System.out.println( x.toStringO ); // output? [reader's exercise :-) ] 


public String toUpperCase() 

Converts all characters of a string to uppercase-heres an example: 

String x = "A New Moon"; 

System.out.println( x.toUpperCase() ); // output is "A NEW MOON" 


public String trim() 



This method returns a String whose value is the String used to invoke the method, but with any leading 
or trailing whitespace removedheres an example: 

String x = " hi "; 

System.out.printIn( x + "t" ); // output is " hi t" 

System.out.println( x.trimO + "t"); // output is "hit" 


The StringBuilder Class 

The j ava. lang . StringBuilder class should be used when you have to make a lot of modifications to 
strings of characters. As discussed in the previous section, string objects are immutable, so if you 
choose to do a lot of manipulations with string objects, you will end up with a lot of abandoned string 
objects in the string pool. (Even in these days of gigabytes of RAM, its not a good idea to waste 
precious memory on discarded string pool objects.) On the other hand, objects of type StringBuilder 
can be modified over and over again without leaving behind a great effluence of discarded string 
objects. 


A common use for stringBuilders is file I/O when large, ever-changing streams of input are being 
handled by the program. In these cases, large blocks of characters are handled as units, and 
StringBuilder objects are the ideal way to handle a block of data, pass it on, and then reuse the 
same memory to handle the next block of data. 

Prefer StringBuilder to StringBuffer 

The StringBuilder class was added in Java 5. It has exacdy the same API as the StringBuffer class, 
except StringBuilder is not thread-safe. In other words, its methods are not synchronized. Oracle 
recommends that you use StringBuilder instead of StringBuffer whenever possible, because 
StringBuilder will run faster (and perhaps jump higher). So apart from synchronization, anything we 
say about stringBuilders methods holds true for stringBuffers methods, and vice versa. That said, 
for the OCA 8 exam, StringBuffer is not tested. 

Using StringBuilder (and This Is the Last Time Well Say This: StringBuffer) 

In the previous section, you saw how the exam might test your understanding of St ring immutability with 
code fragments like this: 

String x = "abc"; 
x.concat("def"); 

System.out.println("x = " + x); // output is "x = abc" 

Because no new assignment was made, the new string object created with the concat () method was 
abandoned instandy. You also saw examples like this: 

String x = "abc"; 
x = x.concat("def"); 

System.out.println("x = " + x); // output is "x = abcdef" 


We got a nice new string out of the deal, but the downside is that the old string "abc" has been lost in 


the string pool, thus wasting memory. If we were using a stringBuilder instead of a String, the code 
would look like this: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("abc"); 

sb.append( M de f") ; 

System.out.printIn("sb = " + sb); // output is "sb = abcdef" 

All of the StringBuilder methods we will discuss operate on the value of the StringBuilder object 
invoking the method. So a call to sb. append ("def"); is actually appending "def" to itself 
(StringBuilder sb). In fact, these method calls can be chained to each otherheres an example: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("abc"); 

sb.append("def").reverse().insert(3 , "-"); 

System.out.printIn( sb ); // output is "fed-cba" 

Notice that in each of the previous two examples, there was a single call to new, so in each example 
we werent creating any extra objects. Each example needed only a single StringBuilder object to 
execute. 



 a t c h 


So far weve seen stringBuilders being built with an argument specifying an initial value. 
StringBuilders can also be built empty, and they can also be constructed with a specific size 

or, more formally, a "capacity." For the exam, there are three ways to create a new 
StringBuilder: 

1. new StringBuilder(); // default cap. = 16 chars 

2. new StringBuilder("ab"); // cap. = 16 + arg's length 

3. new StringBuilder(x); // capacity = x (an integer) 

The two most common ways to work with StringBuilders is via an append () method or an 
insert () method. In terms of a StringBuilder's capacity, there are three rules to keep in 
mind when appending and inserting: 

If an append () grows a StringBuilder past its capacity, the capacity is updated 
automatically. 

If an insert () starts within a StringBuilder's capacity but ends after the current 
capacity, the capacity is updated automatically. 

If an insert () attempts to start at an index after the StringBuilder's current length, 
an exception will be thrown. 


Important Methods in the StringBuilder Class 

The StringBuilder class has a zillion methods. Following are the methods youre most likely to use in 
the real world and, happily, the ones youre most likely to find on the exam 




public StringBuilder append(String s) 

As youve seen earlier, this method will update the value of the object that invoked the method, whether 
or not the returned value is assigned to a variable. Versions of this heavily overloaded method will take 
many different arguments, including boolean, char, double, float, int, long, and others, but the one 
most likely used on the exam will be a string argumentfor example, 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("set "); 
sb.append("point"); 

System.out.println(sb); // output is "set point" 

StringBuilder sb2 = new StringBuilder("pi = "); 
sb2.append(3.14159f); 

System.out.println(sb2); // output is "pi = 3.14159" 

public StringBuilder delete(int start, int end) 

This method modifies the value of the StringBuilder object used to invoke it. The starting index of the 
substring to be removed is defined by the first argument (which is zero-based), and the ending index of the 
substring to be removed is defined by the second argument (but it is one-based)! Study the following 
example carefully: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("0123456789"); 

System.out.println(sb.delete(4,6)); // output is "01236789" 



 a t c h 


The exam will probably test your knowledge of the difference between string and 
StringBuilder objects. Because StringBuilder objects are changeable, the following code 
fragment will behave differently than a similar code fragment that uses string objects: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("abc"); 
sb.append("def"); 

System.out.println( sb ); 

In this case, the output will be: "abode f" 


public StringBuilder insert(int offset. String s) 

This method updates the value of the StringBuilder object that invoked the method call. The string 
passed in to the second argument is inserted into the StringBuilder starting at the offset location 
represented by the first argument (the offset is zero-based). Again, other types of data can be passed in 
through the second argument (boolean, char, double, float, int, long, and so on), but the string argument 
is the one youre most likely to see: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("01234567"); 
sb.insert(4, "-"); 

System.out.println( sb ); // output is "0123-4567" 




public StringBuilder reverse() 

This method updates the value of the StringBuilder object that invoked the method call. When invoked, 
the characters in the StringBuilder are reversedthe first character becoming the last, the second 
becoming the second to the last, and so on: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("A man a plan a canal Panama"); 
sb.reverse(); 

System.out.println(sb); // output: "amanaP lanac a nalp a nam A" 


public String toString() 

This method returns the value of the StringBuilder object that invoked the method call as a String: 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("test string"); 

System.out.println( sb.toString() ); // output is "test string" 

Thats it for stringBuilders. If you take only one thing away from this section, its that unlike string 
objects, StringBuilder objects can be changed. 



atch 


Many of the exam questions covering this chapters topics use a tricky bit of Java syntax 
known as chained methods. A statement with chained methods has this general form: 

result = methodl().method2().method3(); 

In theory, any number of methods can be chained in this fashion, although typically you wont 
see more than three. Heres how to decipher these "handy Java shortcuts" when you encounter 
them: 

1. Determine what the leftmost method call will return (lets call it x). 

2. Use x as the object invoking the second (from the left) method. If there are only two 
chained methods, the result of the second method call is the expressions result. 

3. If there is a third method, the result of the second method call is used to invoke the 
third method, whose result is the expressions result-for example, 

String x = "abc"; 

String y = x.concat("def").toUpperCase().replace('C' x'); //chained methods 
System.out.println("y = " + y); // result is "y = ABxDEF" 

Lets look at what happened. The literal def was concatenated to abc, creating a temporary, 
intermediate string (soon to be lost), with the value abode f. The tollpperCasef ) method was 
called on this string , which created a new (soon to be lost) temporary St ring with the value 
ABCDEF. The replace () method was then called on this second string object, which created a 
final string with the value ABxDEF and ref erred y to it. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 





Working with Calendar Data (OCA Objective 9.3) 

9.3 Create and manipulate calendar data using the following classes: java.time.LocalDateTime, 
java.time.LocalDate, java.time.LocalTime, java.time. format.DateTimeFormatter, java.time.Period 

Java 8 introduced a large collection (argh) of new packages related to working with calendars, dates, 
and times. The OCA 8 creators chose to include knowledge of a subset of these packages and classes as 
an exam objective. If you understand the classes included in the exam objective, youll have a good 
introduction to the entire calendar/date/time topic. As we work through this section, well use the phrase 
"calendar object," which we use to refer to objects of one of the several types of calendar-related classes 
were covering. So "calendar object" is a made-up umbrella term Heres a summary of the five calendar- 
related classes well study, plus an interface that looms large: 

 j ava. time. LocalDateTime This class is used to create immutable objects, each of which 
represents a specific date and time. Additionally, this class provides methods that can manipulate 
the values of the date/time objects created and assign them to new immutable objects. 
LocalDateTime objects contain BOTH information about days, months, and years, AND about 
hours, minutes, seconds, and fractions of seconds. 

 j ava. time. LocalDate This class is used to create immutable objects, each of which 
represents a specific date. Additionally, this class provides methods that can manipulate the values 
of the date objects created and assign them to new immutable objects. LocalDate objects are 
accurate only to days. Hours, minutes, and seconds are not part of a LocalDate object. 

 j ava. time. LocalTime This class is used to create immutable objects, each of which 
represents a specific time. Additionally, this class provides methods that can manipulate the values 
of the time objects created and assign them to new immutable objects. LocalTime objects refer 
only to hours, minutes, seconds, and fractions of seconds. Days, months, and years are not a part of 
LocalTime objects. 

 java, time. format. DateTimeFormatter This class is used by the classes just described to 
format date/time objects for output and to parse input strings and convert them to date/time objects. 
DateTimeFormatter objects are also immutable. 

 j ava. time. Period This class is used to create immutable objects that represent a period of 
time, for example, "one year, two months, and three days." This class works in years, months, and 
days. If you want to represent chunks of time in increments finer than a day (e.g., hours and 
minutes), you can use the java, time. Duration class, but Duration is not on the exam 

 java. time, temporal. TemporalAmount This interface is implemented by the Period class. 
When you use Period objects to manipulate (see the following section), calendar objects, youll 
often use methods that take objects that implement TemporalAmount. In general, as you use the 
Java API more and more, its a good idea to learn which classes implement which interfaces; this 
is a key way to learn how the classes in complex packages interact with each other. 


Immutability 

There are a couple of recurring themes in the previous definitions. First, notice that most of the calendar- 
related objects youll create are immutable. Just like string objects! So when we say were going to 
"manipulate" a calendar object, what we "really" mean is that well invoke a method on a calendar 


object, and well return a new calendar object that represents the result of manipulating the value of the 
original calendar object. But the original calendar objects value is not, and cannot, be changed. Just like 
strings! Lets see an example: 

LocalDate datel = LocalDate.of(2017, 1, 31); 

Period periodl = Period.ofMonths(1); 

System.out.println(datel); 

datel .plus (periodl); // new value is 

System.out.println(datel); 

LocalDate date2 = datel. plus (periodl); // new value is 

System.out.println(date2); 

which produces: 

2017-01-31 
2017-01-31 
2017-02-28 


lost 

captured 


Notice that invoking the plus method on datel doesnt change its value, but assigning the result of the 
plus method to date2 captures a new value. Expect exam questions that test your understanding of the 
immutability of calendar objects. 


Factory Classes 

The next thing to notice in the previous code listing is that we never used the keyword new in the code. 
We didnt direcdy invoke a constructor. None of the five classes listed in OCA 8 objective 9.3 have 
public constructors. Instead, for all these classes, you invoke a public static method in the class to 
create a new object. As you go further into your studies of OO design, youll come across the phrases 
"factory pattern," "factory methods," and "factory classes." Usually, when a class has no public 
constructors and provides at least one public static method that can create new instances of the class, 
that class is called a factory class, and any method that is invoked to get a new instance of the class is 
called a factory method. There are many good reasons to create factory classes, most of which are 
beyond the scope of this book, but one of them we will discuss now. If we use the LocalDate class as an 
example, we find the following static methods that create and return a new instance: 


from() 
now () 

// 

three overloaded methods exist 

of () 

// 

two 

overloaded 

methods 

exist 

ofEpochDay() 
ofYearDay() 
parse() 

// 

two 

overloaded 

methods 

exist 


So we have what, about ten different ways to create a new LocalDate object? By using methods with 
different names (instead of using overloaded constructors), the method names themselves make the code 
more readable. Its clearer what variation of LocalDate were making. As you use more and more 
classes from the Java API, youll discover that the API creators use factory classes a lot. 


 a t c h 





Whenever you see an exam question relating to dates or times , be on the lookout for the new 
keyword. This is your tipoff that the code wont compile: 

LocalDateTime dl = new LocalDateTime(); // won't compile 

Remember the exams date and time classes use factory methods to create new objects. 


Using and Manipulating Dates and Times 

Now that we know how to create new calendar-related objects, lets turn to using and manipulating them. 
(And you know what we mean when we say "manipulate.") The following code demonstrates some 
common uses and powerful features of the new Java 8 calendar-related classes: 





import j ava.time.*; 

import java.time.format.*; 

import java.time.temporal.ChronoUnit; 

public class DrWho { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
DateTimeFormatter f = 

DateTimeFormatter.ofPattern("MMddyyyy"); 
LocalDate bday = null; 
try { 

bday = LocalDate.parse(args[0], f); 


} catch (java.time.DateTimeException e) { 

System, out .printIn (bad dates Indy"); 

System.exit(0); 

} 

System.out.printIn("your birthday is: " + bday); 
System.out.println("a " + bday.getDayOfWeek()); 


// not on the exam 
// but VERY useful 


// describe a format 

// verify input date 
// often parse() methods 
// throw exceptions! 


// useful 


Period pi = Period.between(bday, LocalDate.now()); // very useful! 

System.out.println("you've lived for: "); 

System.out.print(pi.getDays() + " days, "); // split up a Period 

System.out.print(pi.getMonths() + " months, "); 

System.out.println(pi.getYears() + " years"); 

int yearsOld = pi.getYears(); 
if(yearsOld < 0 || yearsOld > 119) 

System.out.println("Wow, are you a time lord?"); 


long tDays = bday.until(LocalDate.now(), 

ChronoUnit.DAYS); 

System.out.println("youve lived for " + tDays 

+ " days, so far"); 


// handy method + 

// handy enum 

// = powerful date math 


System.out.println("you'11 reach 30,000 days on 

+ bday.plusDays(30_000)); 


// date math 


LocalDate d2000 = LocalDate.of(2_000, 1,1); // of() is a 

// commonly used 
// 'factory' method 

Period p2 = Period.between(d2000, LocalDate.nowO); 

System.out.println("period since Y2K: " + p2); 

} 


Invoking the program with a relevant birthday: 
java 01201934 


produces the output (when run on January 13, 2017): 


your birthday is: 1934-01-20 
a SATURDAY 
you've lived for: 

24 days, 11 months, 82 years 
you've lived for 30309 days, so far 
you'll reach 30000 days on 2016-03-10 
period since Y2K: P17Y12D 

Theres a lot going on here, so lets do a walk-through. First, we want users to enter their birthday in 
the form of mmddyyyy. We use a DateTimeFormatter object to parse the users first argument and verify 
that its a valid date of the form were hoping for. Usually in the Java API, par se () methods can throw 
exceptions, so we have to do our parsing in a try/catch block. 

Next, we print out the verified date and show off a bit by printing out what day of the week that date 
occurred on. This calculation would be quite tricky to do by hand! 

Next, we create a Period object that represents the amount of time between the users birthday and 
today, and we use various getx( ) methods to list the details of the Period object. 

After making sure were not dealing with a time lord, we then use the very powerful until () method 
and "day" as the unit of time to determine how many days the user has been alive. We cheated a bit here 
and used the Chronollnit enum from the java. time. temporal package. (Even though ChronoUnit isnt 
on the exam, we think if you do a lot of calendar calculations, youll end up using this enum a lot.) 

Next, we add 30,000 days to the users birthday so we can calculate on which date our user will have 
lived for 30,000 days. Its a short jump to seeing how these sorts of calendar calculations will be very 
powerful for scheduling applications, project management applications, travel planning, and so on. 

Finally, we use a common factory method, of (), to create another date object (representing todays 
date), and we use that in conjunction with the very powerful between () method to see how long its been 
since January 1, 2000, Y2K. 


F ormatting Dates and Times 

Now lets turn to formatting dates and times using the DateTimeFormatter class, so your calendar 
objects will look all shiny when you want to include them in your programs output. For the exam, you 
should know the following two-step process for creating strings that represent well-formatted calendar 
objects: 


1. Use formatters and patterns from the HUGE lists provided in the DateTimeFormatter class 
to create a DataTimeFormatter object. 

2. In the LocalDate, LocalDateTime, and LocalTime classes, use the format() method with 
the DateTimeFormatter object as the argument to create a well-formed string or use the 
DateTimeFormatter . format () method with a calendar argument to create a well-formed string 
Lets look at a few examples: 


import java.time.*; 
import java.time.format.*; 
public class NiceDates { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

DateTimeFormatter fl = 

DateTimeFormatter.ofPattern("MMM dd, yyyy"); 

DateTimeFormatter f2 = 

DateTimeFormatter.ofPattern("E MMM dd, yyyy G"); 

DateTimeFormatter tfl = 

DateTimeFormatter.ofPattern("k:m:s A a M ); 

LocalDate d = LocalDate.now(); 

String s = d.format(fl); // thus proving that the format() 

// method makes String objects 

System.out.printIn (s) ; 

System.out.println(d.format(f2)); 

LocalTime t = LocalTime.now(); 

System.out.println(t.format(tfl)); 

} 

} 

which, when we ran this code, produced the following (your output will vary): 

Jan 14, 2017 
Sat Jan 14, 2017 AD 
14:17:9 51429958 PM 

Some of the pattern codes we used are self-evident (e.g. MMM dd yyyy), and some are fairly arbitrary 
like "E" for day of week or "k" for military hours. All of the codes can be found in the 
DateTimeFormatter API. 

Thats enough about calendars; on to arrays! 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Using Arrays (OCA Objectives 4.1 and 4.2) 

4.1 Declare, instantiate, initialize, and use a one-dimensional array. 

4.2 Declare, instantiate, initialize, and use a multi-dimensional array. 

Arrays are objects in Java that store multiple variables of the same type. Arrays can hold either 
primitives or object references, but the array itself will always be an object on the heap, even if the array 
is declared to hold primitive elements. In other words, there is no such thing as a primitive array, but you 
can make an array of primitives. For this objective, you need to know three things: 

i How to make an array reference variable (declare) 
m How to make an array object (construct) 
i How to populate the array with elements (initialize) 

There are several different ways to do each of these, and you need to know about all of them for the exam 


; n the 

yob 



Arrays are efficient, but most of the time youll want to use one of the Collection types from 
java.util (including HashMap, ArrayList, and TreeSet). Collection classes offer more flexible 
ways to access an object (for insertion, deletion, and so on), and unlike arrays, they can expand or 
contract dynamically as you add or remove elements (theyre really managed arrays, since they use 
arrays behind the scenes). Theres a Collection type for a wide range of needs. Do you need a fast 
sort? A group of objects with no duplicates? A way to access a name/value pair? A linked list? The 
OCP 8 exam covers collections in more detail. 


Declaring an Array 

Arrays are declared by stating the type of element the array will hold, which can be an object or a 
primitive, followed by square brackets to the left or right of the identifier. 

Declaring an array of primitives: 

int[] key; // brackets before name (recommended) 

int key []; // brackets after name (legal but less readable) 

// spaces between the name and [] legal, but bad 


Declaring an array of object references: 

Thread[] threads; // Recommended 

Thread threads[]; // Legal but less readable 

When declaring an array reference, you should always put the array brackets immediately after the 
declared type rather than after the identifier (variable name). That way, anyone reading the code can 
easily tell that, for example, key is a reference to an int array object and not an int primitive. 

We can also declare multidimensional arrays, which are, in fact, arrays of arrays. This can be done in 
the following manner: 

String [] [] [] occupantName; // recommended 

String [] managerName [] ; // yucky, but legal 

The first example is a three-dimensional array (an array of arrays of arrays) and the second is a two- 
dimensional array. Notice in the second example we have one square bracket before the variable name 
and one after. This is perfecdy legal to the compiler, proving once again that just because its legal 
doesnt mean its right. 

It is never legal to include the size of the array in your declaration. Yes, we know you can do that in 
some other languages, which is why you might see a question or two in the exam that include code similar 
to the following: 

int[5] scores; // will NOT compile 

The preceding code wont make it past the compiler. Remember, the JVM doesnt allocate space until you 
actually instantiate the array object. Thats when size matters. 


Constructing an Array 

Constructing an array means creating the array object on the heap (where all objects live)that is, doing 
a new on the array type. To create an array object, Java must know how much space to allocate on the 


heap, so you must specify the size of the array at creation time. The size of the array is the number of 
elements the array will hold. 

Constructing One-Dimensional Arrays 

The most straightforward way to construct an array is to use the keyword new followed by the array type, 
with a bracket specifying how many elements of that type the array will hold. The following is an example 
of constructing an array of type int: 

int [] testScores; // Declares the array of ints 

testScores = new int[4]; // constructs an array and assigns it 

// to the testScores variable 

The preceding code puts one new object on the heapan array object holding four elementswith each 
element containing an int with a default value of 0. Think of this code as saying to the compiler, "Create 
an array object that will hold four ints, and assign it to the reference variable named testScores. Also, 
go ahead and set each int element to zero. Thanks." (The compiler appreciates good manners.) 

Figure 6-4 shows the testScores array on the heap, after construction. 



Values 

Indices 


You can also declare and construct an array in one statement, as follows: 
int[] testScores = new int[4]; 

This single statement produces the same result as the two previous statements. 

Arrays of object types can be constructed in the same way: 

Thread[] threads = new Thread[5]; // no Thread objects created! 

// one Thread array created 

Remember that, despite how the code appears, the Thread constructor is not being invoked. Were not 
creating a Thread instance, but rather a single Thread array object. After the preceding statement, there 
are still no actual Thread objects! 

















O Aten 


Think carefully about how many objects are on the heap after a code statement or block 
executes. The exam will expect you to know, for example, that the preceding code produces just 
one object (the array assigned to the reference variable named threads). The single object 
referenced by threads holds five Thread reference variables, but no Thread objects have been 
created or assigned to those references. 


Remember, arrays must always be given a size at the time they are constructed. The JVM needs the size 
to allocate the appropriate space on the heap for the new array object. It is never legal, for example, to do 
the following: 

int[] carList = new int[]; // Will not compile; needs a size 

So dont do it, and if you see it on the test, run screaming toward the nearest answer marked "Compilation 
fails." 



 a t c h 


You may see the words "construct," "create," and "instantiate " used interchangeably. They all 
mean, "An object is built on the heap." This also implies that the objects constructor runs as 
a result of the construct/create/instantiate code. You can say with certainty, for example, that 
any code that uses the keyword new will (if it runs successfully) cause the class constructor and 
all superclass constructors to run. 


In addition to being constructed with new, arrays can be created using a kind of syntax shorthand that 
creates the array while simultaneously initializing the array elements to values supplied in code (as 
opposed to default values). Well look at that in the next section. For now, understand that because of 
these syntax shortcuts, objects can still be created even without you ever using or seeing the keyword new. 

Constructing Multidimensional Arrays 

Multidimensional arrays, remember, are simply arrays of arrays. So a two-dimensional array of type int 
is really an object of type int array (int [ ]), with each element in that array holding a reference to 
another int array. The second dimension holds the actual int primitives. 

The following code declares and constructs a two-dimensional array of type int: 

int[][] myArray = new int[3][]; 

Notice that only the first brackets are given a size. Thats acceptable in Java because the JVM needs to 
know only the size of the object assigned to the variable myArray. 

Figure 6-5 shows how a two-dimensional int array works on the heap. 






The heap 



myArray 


int [ ] [ 

reference variable 


Picture demonstrates 1 

the result of the following code: 

int [ ] [ ] 

myArray = new int[3][ ]; 

myArray[0] 

= 

new int [2]; 

myArray[0] 

[0] 

= 6; 

myArray[0] 

[1] 

= 7; 

myArray[1] 

= 

new int [3] ; 

myArray [1] 

[0] 

= 9; 

myArray[1] 

[1] 

= 8; 

myArray[1] 

[2] 

= 5; 


FIGURE 6-5 


A two-dimensional array on the heap 


Initializing an Array 

Initializing an array means putting things into it. The "things" in the array are the arrays elements, and 
theyre either primitive values ( 2 , x, false, and so on) or objects referred to by the reference variables in 
the array. If you have an array of objects (as opposed to primitives), the array doesnt actually hold the 
objectsjust as any other nonprimitive variable never actually holds the objectbut instead holds a 
reference to the object. But we talk about arrays as, for example, "an array of five strings," even though 
what we really mean is "an array of five references to St ring objects." Then the big question becomes 
whether those references are actually pointing (oops, this is Java, we mean referring) to real string 
objects or are simply null. Remember, a reference that has not had an object assigned to it is a null 
reference. And if you actually try to use that null reference by, say, applying the dot operator to 
invoke a method on it, youll get the infamous NullPointerException. 

The individual elements in the array can be accessed with an index number. The index number always 
begins with zero (0), so for an array of ten objects, the index numbers will run from 0 through 9. Suppose 

























we create an array of three Animals as follows: 

Animal [] pets = new Animal[3]; 

We have one array object on the heap, with three null references of type Animal, but we dont have 
any Animal objects. The next step is to create some Animal objects and assign them to index positions in 
the array referenced by pets: 

pets [0] = new AnimalO; 
pets [1] = new AnimalO; 
pets [2] = new AnimalO; 

This code puts three new Animal objects on the heap and assigns them to the three index positions 
(elements) in the pets array. 



 a t c h 


Look for code that tries to access an out-of-range array index. For example, if an array has 
three elements, trying to access the element [3] will raise an 

ArraylndexOutofBoundsException, because in an array of three elements, the legal index 
values are 0,1, and 2. You also might see an attempt to use a negative number as an array 
index. The following are examples of legal and illegal array access attempts. Be sure to 
recognize that these cause runtime exceptions and not compiler errors! 

Nearly all the exam questions list both runtime exception and compiler error as possible 
answers: 

int [] x = new int [5] ; 

x[4] =2; // OK, the last element is at index 4 

x[5] =3; // Runtime exception. There is no element at index 5! 

int [] z = new int [2] ; 
int y = -3; 

z[y] = 4; // Runtime exception, y is a negative number 

numberThese can be hard to spot in a complex loop, but thats where youre most likely to see 
array index problems in exam questions. 


A two-dimensional array (an array of arrays) can be initialized as follows: 




int [] [] scores = new int[3] [] ; 

// Declare and create an array (scores) holding three references 
// to int arrays 

scores [0] = new int[4] ; 

// the first element in the scores array is an int array 
// of four int elements 

scores[1] = new int [6] ; 

// the second element is an int array of six int elements 
scores [2] = new int [1] ; 

// the third element is an int array of one int element 


Initializing Elements in a Loop 

Array objects have a single public variable, length, that gives you the number of elements in the array. 
The last index value, then, is always one less than the length. For example, if the length of an array is 
4, the index values are from 0 through 3. Often, youll see array elements initialized in a loop, as follows: 

Dog[] myDogs = new Dog [6] ; // creates an array of 6 Dog references 
for(int x = 0; x < myDogs.length; x+ + ) { 

myDogs[x] = new Dog(); // assign a new Dog to index position x 

} 

The length variable tells us how many elements the array holds, but it does not tell us whether those 
elements have been initialized. 

Declaring, Constructing, and Initializing on One Line 

You can use two different array-specific syntax shortcuts both to initialize (put explicit values into an 
arrays elements) and construct (instantiate the array object itself) in a single statement. The first is used 
to declare, create, and initialize in one statement, as follows: 

1. int x = 9; 

2. int [] dots = {6,x,8}; 

Line 2 in the preceding code does four things: 

 Declares an int array reference variable named dots. 

 Creates an int array with a length of three (three elements). 

 Populates the arrays elements with the values 6, 9, and 8. 

i Assigns the new array object to the reference variable dots. 

The size (length of the array) is determined by the number of comma-separated items between the curly 
braces. The code is functionally equivalent to the following longer code: 


int [] dots; 
dots = new int[3]; 
int x = 9; 
dots[0] = 6; 

dots [1] = x; 

dots [2] = 8; 

This begs the question, "Why would anyone use the longer way?" One reason comes to mind. You 
might not knowat the time you create the arraythe values that will be assigned to the arrays elements. 
With object references rather than primitives, it works exacdy the same way: 

Dog puppy = new Dog("Frodo"); 

Dog[] myDogs = {puppy, new Dog("Clover"), new Dog( M Aiko M )}; 

The preceding code creates one Dog array, referenced by the variable myDogs, with a length of three 
elements. It assigns a previously created Dog object (assigned to the reference variable puppy) to the first 
element in the array. It also creates two new Dog objects (Clover and Aiko) and adds them to the last two 
Dog reference variable elements in the myDogs array. This array shortcut alone (combined with the 
stimulating prose) is worth the price of this book. Figure 6-6 shows the result. 



puppy 


Dog reference 
variable 


myDogs 


Dog [ ] array 
reference variable 


Picture demonstrates the result of the following code: 

Dog puppy = new Dog ("Frodo"); 

Dog[ ] myDogs = {puppy, new Dog("Clover"), new Dog("Aiko")}; 

Four objects are created: 

I Dog object referenced by puppy and by myDogs [0] 

1 Dog [ ] array referenced by myDogs 

2 Dog object referenced by myDogs [1] and myDogs [2] 














FIGURE 6-6 


Declaring, constructing, and initializing an array of objects 


You can also use the shortcut syntax with multidimensional arrays, as follows: 
int[] [] scores = {{5,2,4,7}, {9,2}, {3,4}}; 

This code creates a total of four objects on the heap. First, an array of int arrays is constructed (the 
object that will be assigned to the scores reference variable). The scores array has a length of three, 
derived from the number of comma-separated items between the outer curly braces. Each of the three 
elements in the scores array is a reference variable to an int array, so the three int arrays are 
constructed and assigned to the three elements in the scores array. 

The size of each of the three int arrays is derived from the number of items within the corresponding 
inner curly braces. For example, the first array has a length of four, the second array has a length of two, 
and the third array has a length of two. So far, we have four objects: one array of int arrays (each 
element is a reference to an int array), and three int arrays (each element in the three int arrays is an 
int value). Finally, the three int arrays are initialized with the actual int values within the inner curly 
braces. Thus, the first int array contains the values 5,2,4, 7. The following code shows the values of 
some of the elements in this two-dimensional array: 


scores [0] 


// 

an 

array 

of 

4 

ints 

scores[1] 


// 

an 

array 

of 

2 

ints 

scores[2] 


// 

an 

array 

of 

2 

ints 

scores[0] 

in 

// 

the 

int value 

2 

scores[2] 

in 

// 

the 

int value 

4 


Figure 6-7 shows the result of declaring, constructing, and initializing a two-dimensional array in one 
statement. 



The heap 



myCats 


Cat [ ] [ ] array 
reference variable 


Picture demonstrates the result of the following code: 

Cat[ ][ ] myCats = {{new Cat("Fluffy"), new Cat("Zeus")}, 
{new Cat("Bilbo"), new Cat("Legolas"), new Cat("Bert")}}; 

Eight objects are created: 

1 2-D Cat [ ] [ ] array object 

2 Cat [ ] array object 
5 Cat object 


FIGURE 6-7 


Declaring, constructing, and initializing a two-dimensional array 


Constructing and Initializing an Anonymous Array 

The second shortcut is called "anonymous array creation" and can be used to construct and initialize an 
array and then assign the array to a previously declared array reference variable: 

int[] testScores; 

testScores = new int[] {4,7,2}; 

The preceding code creates a new int array with three elements; initializes the three elements with the 
values 4, 7, and 2 ; and then assigns the new array to the previously declared int array reference variable 
testScores. We call this anonymous array creation because with this syntax, you dont even need to 
assign the new array to anything. Maybe youre wondering, "What good is an array if you dont assign it to 
a reference variable?" You can use it to create a just-in-time array to use, for example, as an argument to a 
method that takes an array parameter. 

The following code demonstrates a just-in-time array argument: 
























// use the array 


public class JIT { 

void takesAnArray(int[] someArray) { 
public static void main (String [] args) { 

JIT j = new JIT(); 
j.takesAnArray(new int [] 17,7,8,2,5}); // pass an array 



 a t c h 


Remember that you do not specify a size when using anonymous array creation syntax. The 
size is derived from the number of items (comma-separated) between the curly braces. Pay very 
close attention to the array syntax used in exam questions (and there will be a lot of them). You 
might see syntax such as this: 

new Object [3] {null, new ObjectO, new Object ()}; 

// not legal; size must not be specified 


Legal Array Element Assignments 

What can you put in a particular array? For the exam, you need to know that arrays can have only one 
declared type (int [ ], Dog [ ], string [ ], and so on), but that doesnt necessarily mean that only objects 
or primitives of the declared type can be assigned to the array elements. And what about the array 
reference itself? What kind of array object can be assigned to a particular array reference? For the exam, 
youll need to know the answers to all of these questions. And, as if by magic, were actually covering 
those very same topics in the following sections. Pay attention. 


Arrays of Primitives Primitive arrays can accept any value that can be promoted implicidy to the 
declared type of the array. For example, an int array can hold any value that can fit into a 32-bit int 
variable. Thus, the following code is legal: 


int[] weightList = 
byte b = 4; 
char c = 'c ' ; 
short s = 7; 
weightList[0] = b; 

weightList[1] = c; 

weightList[2] = s; 


new int[5]; 


// 

// 

// 


OK, byte is smaller than int 
OK, char is smaller than int 
OK, short is smaller than int 


Arrays of Object References If the declared array type is a class, you can put objects of any subclass of 
the declared type into the array For example, if Subaru is a subclass of Car, you can put both Subaru 
objects and Car objects into an array of type Car as follows: 

class Car {} 

class Subaru extends Car {} 
class Ferrari extends Car {} 

Car [] myCars = {new Subaru(), new Car(), new Ferrari()}; 




It helps to remember that the elements in a Car array are nothing more than Car reference variables. So 
anything that can be assigned to a Car reference variable can be legally assigned to a Car array element. 

If the array is declared as an interface type, the array elements can refer to any instance of any class 
that implements the declared interface. The following code demonstrates the use of an interface as an 
array type: 


interface Sporty { 
void beSportyO ; 

} 

class Ferrari extends Car implements Sporty { 
public void beSportyO { 

// implement cool sporty method in a Ferrari-specific way 

n 

class RacingFlats extends AthleticShoe implements Sporty { 
public void beSportyO { 

// implement cool sporty method in a RacingFlat-specific way 


}} 

class GolfClub { } 
class TestSportyThings { 

public static void main (String [] args) { 
Sporty[] sportyThings = new Sporty [3]; 
sportyThings[0] = new Ferrari(); // 

// 

sportyThings[1] = new RacingFlats(); // 

// 

sportyThings[2] = new GolfClub(); // 


OK, Ferrari 
implements Sporty 
OK, RacingFlats 
implements Sporty 
NOT ok.. 


// Not OK; GolfClub does not implement Sporty 
// I dont care what anyone says 

}} 

The bottom line is this: any object that passes the IS-A test for the declared array type can be assigned 
to an element of that array. 

Array Reference Assignments for One-Dimensional Arrays For the exam, you need to recognize legal 
and illegal assignments for array reference variables. Were not talking about references in the array (in 
other words, array elements), but rather references to the array object. For example, if you declare an int 
array, the reference variable you declared can be reassigned to any int array (of any size), but the 
variable cannot be reassigned to anything that is not an int array, including an int value. Remember, all 
arrays are objects, so an int array reference cannot refer to an int primitive. The following code 
demonstrates legal and illegal assignments for primitive arrays: 

int [] splats; 

int [] dats = new int [4] ; 

char[] letters = new char [5] ; 

splats = dats; // OK, dats refers to an int array 

splats = letters; // NOT OK, letters refers to a char array 

Its tempting to assume that because a variable of type byte, short, or char can be explicidy 
promoted and assigned to an int, an array of any of those types could be assigned to an int array. You 
cant do that in Java, but it would be just like those cruel, heardess (but otherwise attractive) exam 
developers to put tricky array assignment questions in the exam 


Arrays that hold object references, as opposed to primitives, arent as restrictive. Just as you can put a 
Honda object in a Car array (because Honda extends Car), you can assign an array of type Honda to a Car 
array reference variable as follows: 

Car [] cars; 

Honda[] cuteCars = new Honda[5]; 

cars = cuteCars; // OK because Honda is a type of Car 

Beer [] beers = new Beer [99] ; 

cars = beers; // NOT OK, Beer is not a type of Car 

Apply the IS-A test to help sort the legal from the illegal. Honda IS-A Car, so a Honda array can be 
assigned to a Car array. Beer IS-A Car is not true; Beer does not extend Car (plus it doesnt make sense, 
unless youve already had too much of it). 

The rules for array assignment apply to interfaces as well as classes. An array declared as an interface 
type can reference an array of any type that implements the interface. Remember, any object from a class 
implementing a particular interface will pass the IS-A (instanceof ) test for that interface. For example, 
if Box implements Foldable, the following is legal: 

Foldable[] foldingThings; 

Box[] boxThings = new Box [3] ; 

foldingThings = boxThings; 

// OK, Box implements Foldable, so Box IS-A Foldable 



atch 


You cannot reverse the legal assignments. A Car array cannot be assigned to a Honda array. A 
Car is not necessarily a Honda , so if youve declared a Honda array, it might blow up if you 
assigned a Car array to the Honda reference variable. Think about it: a Car array could hold a 
reference to a Ferrari , so someone who thinks they have an array of Hondas could suddenly 
find themselves with a Ferrari. Remember that the IS-A test can be checked in code using the 
instanceof operator. 


Array Reference Assignments for Multidimensional Arrays When you assign an array to a previously 
declared array reference, the array youre assigning must be in the same dimension as the reference youre 
assigning it to. For example, a two-dimensional array of int arrays cannot be assigned to a regular int 
array reference, as follows: 

int [] blots; 

int [] [] squeegees = new int [3] [] ; 

blots = squeegees; // NOT OK, squeegees is a 

// two-d array of int arrays 

int [] blocks = new int [6] ; 

blots = blocks; // OK, blocks is an int array 

Pay particular attention to array assignments using different dimensions. You might, for example, be 
asked if its legal to assign an int array to the first element in an array of int arrays, as follows: 




int [] [] books = new int [3] [] ; 
int [] numbers = new int [6] ; 
int aNumber = 7; 

books[0] = aNumber; // NO, expecting an int array not an int 

books [0] = numbers; // OK, numbers is an int array 

Figure 6-8 shows an example of legal and illegal assignments for references to an array. 



Fluffy 


Cat [ ] array 
reference variable 
Array reference variable can 
ONLY refer toal-D Cat array 


moreCats 


The heap 


Cat [ ] array 
object 


null 


/ Cat object 

/Cat object (^goLas) Cat ob i ect 


Element in a 1-D Cat array can 
ONLY refer to a Cat object 


Cat [ ] array 
object 


myCats 


2-D Cat [ ] [ ] array object 
Element in a 2-D Cat array can ONLY 
refer to a 1-D Cat array 


Cat [ ] [ ] 2-D array 
reference variable 
2-D reference variable can 
ONLY refer to a 2-D Cat array 


Illegal Array Reference Assignments 

A myCats = myCats[0]; 

// Can't assign a 1-D array to a 2-D array reference 
B myCats = myCats[0][0]; 

// Can't assign a nonarray object to a 2-D array reference 
C myCats[1] = myCats[1] [2] ; 

// Can't assign a nonarray object to a 1-D array reference 
DmyCats[0][1] = moreCats; 

// Can't assign an array object to a nonarray reference 
// myCats[0][1] can only refer to a Cat object 


KEY 


-? 

Legal 


- ? 

Illegal 


FIGURE 6-8 


Legal and illegal array assignments 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Using ArrayLists and Wrappers (OCA Objectives 9.4 and 
2.5) 


9.3 Declare and use an ArrayList of a given type. 






























2.5 Develop code that uses wrapper classes such as Boolean, Double, and Integer. 

Data structures are a part of almost every application youll ever work on. The Java API provides 
an extensive range of classes that support common data structures such as Lists, sets, Maps, and 
Queues. For the purpose of the OCA exam, you should remember that the classes that support these 
common data structures are a part of what is known as "The Collection API" (one of its many aliases). 
(The OCP exam covers the most common implementations of all these structures.) 


When to Use ArrayLists 

Weve already talked about arrays. Arrays seem useful and pretty darned flexible. So why do we need 
more functionality than arrays provide? Consider these two situations: 

 You need to be able to increase and decrease the size of your list of things. 

The order of things in your list is important and might change. 

Both situations can be handled with arrays, but its not easy.... 

Suppose you want to plan a vacation to Europe. You have several destinations in mind (Paris, Oslo, 
Rome), but youre not yet sure in what order you want to visit these cities, and as your planning 
progresses, you might want to add or subtract cities from your list. Lets say your first idea is to travel 
from north to south, so your list looks like this: 

Oslo, Paris, Rome. 

If we were using an array, we could start with this: 

String[] cities = {"Oslo", "Paris", "Rome"}; 

But now imagine that you remember that you REALLY want to go to London, too! Youve got two 
problems: 

 Your cities array is already full. 

 If youre going from north to south, you need to insert London before Paris. 

Of course, you can figure out a way to do this. Maybe you create a second array, and you copy cities 
from one array to the other, and at the correct moment you add London to the second array. Doable, but 
difficult. 

Now lets see how you could do the same thing with an Array List: 


import java.util.*; // ArrayList lives in .util 

public class Cities { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

List<String> c = new ArrayList<String>(); 
c.add("Oslo"); 
c.add("Paris"); 
c.add("Rome"); 

int index = c.indexOf("Paris"); 

System.out.println(c + " " + index); 
c.add(index, "London"); 

System.out.println(c); 

} 

} 

The output will be something like this: 

[Oslo, Paris, Rome] 1 
[Oslo, London, Paris, Rome] 

By reviewing the code, we can learn some important facts about Array Lists: 

I The ArrayList class is in the java, util package. 

 Similar to arrays, when you build an ArrayList, you have to declare what kind of objects it 
can contain. In this case, were building an ArrayList of String objects. (Well look at the line of 
code that creates the ArrayList in a lot more detail in a minute.) 

 ArrayList implements the List interface. 

We work with the ArrayList through methods. In this case we used a couple of versions of 
add(); we used indexOf (); and, indirecdy, we used tost ring () to display the Array Lists 
contents. (More on toString() in a minute.) 

 Like arrays, indexes for Array Lists are zero-based. 

li We didnt declare how big the ArrayList was when we built it. 

We were able to add a new element to the ArrayList on the fly. 

We were able to add the new element in the middle of the list, 
i; The ArrayList maintained its order. 

As promised, we need to look at the following line of code more closely: 

List<String> c = new ArrayList<String>(); 

First off, we see that this is a polymorphic declaration. As we said earlier, ArrayList implements the 
List interface (also in j ava. util). If you plan to take the OCP 8 exam after youve aced the OCA 8, 
youll learn a lot more about why we might want to do a polymorphic declaration. For now, imagine that 
someday you might want to create a List of your Array Lists. 

Next, we have this weird-looking syntax with the < and > characters. This syntax was added to the 
language in Java 5, and it has to do with "generics." Generics arent really included in the OCA exam, so 
we dont want to spend a lot of time on them here, but whats important to know is that this is how you tell 
the compiler and the JVM that for this particular ArrayList you want only strings to be allowed. What 
this means is if the compiler can tell that youre trying to add a "not-a-String" object to this ArrayList, 


// create an ArrayList, c 
// add original cities 

// find Paris' index 

// add London before Paris 
// show the contents of c 


your code wont compile. This is a good thing! 

Also as promised, lets look at THIS line of code: 

System.out.printIn(c); 

Remember that all classes ultimately inherit from class Ob j ect. Class Ob j ect contains a method called 
tost ring (). Again, toString () isnt "officially" on the OCA exam (of course, it IS in the OCP exam!), 
but you need to understand it a bit for now. When you pass an object reference to either 
System. out. print( ) or System. out. println( ), youre telling them to invoke that objects 
tost ring () method. (Whenever you make a new class, you can optionally override the toString () 
method your class inherited from Ob j ect to show useful information about your classs objects.) The API 
developers were nice enough to override Array Lists tost ring () method for you to show the contents 
of the ArrayList, as you saw in the programs output. Hooray! 

ArrayLists and Duplicates 

As youre planning your trip to Europe, you realize that halfway through your stay in Rome, theres going 
to be a fantastic music festival in Naples! Naples is just down the coast from Rome! Youve got to add 
that side trip to your itinerary. The question is, can an ArrayList have duplicate entries? Is it legal to say 
this: 


c.add("Rome"); 
c.add("Naples"); 
c.add("Rome"); 

And the short answer is: Yes, ArrayLists can have duplicates. Now if you stop and think about it, the 
notion of "duplicate Java objects" is actually a bit tricky. Relax, because you wont have to get into that 
trickiness until you study for the OCP 8. 



atch 


Technically speaking, ArrayLists hold only object references, not actual objects and not 
primitives. If you see code like this, 

myArrayList.add(7); 

whats really happening is the int is being autoboxed (converted) into an Integer object and 
then added to the ArrayList. Well talk more about autoboxing in a few pages. 


ArrayList Methods in Action 

Lets look at another piece of code that shows off most of the ArrayList methods you need to know for 
the exam: 




import java.util.*; 
public class TweakLists { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

List<String> myList = new ArrayList<String>(); 


myList.add("z"); 
myList.add("x"); 
myList.add(1, "y"); 

myList.add(0, "w"); 

System.out.printIn(myList) ; 


// zero based 
// " 

// [w, z, y, x] 


myList.clear(); 
myList.add("b"); 
myList.add("a"); 
myList.add("c"); 

System.out.println(myList) 


// remove everything 


// [b, a, c] 


System. out.println (myList. contains ( "a" ) + 


+ myList.contains("x")); 


System.out.println("get 1: " + myList.get(1)); 

System.out.println("index of c: " + myList.indexOf("c")); 

myList.remove(1); // remove "a" 

System.out.println("size: " + myList.size() + " contents: " + myList); 

} 

} 

which should produce something like this: 

[w, z, y, x] 

[b, a, c] 
true false 
get 1: a 
index of c: 2 
size: 2 contents: [b, c] 

A couple of quick notes about this code: First off, notice that contains () returns a boolean. This 
makes contains! ) great to use in "if" tests. Second, notice that ArrayList has a size( ) method. Its 
important to remember that arrays have a length attribute and ArrayLists have a size( ) method. 


Important Methods in the ArrayList Class 

The following methods are some of the more commonly used methods in the ArrayList class and also 
those that youre most likely to encounter on the exam: 

 add (element) Adds this element to the end of the ArrayList 

 add (index, element ) Adds this element at the index point and shifts the remaining elements 
back (for example, what was at index is now at index + l) 

 clear () Removes all the elements from the ArrayList 

boolean contains(element) Returns whether the element is in the list 

 Object get(index) Returns the Object located at index 

 int indexof (Object) Returns the (int) location of the element or -l if the Object is not 


found 

 remove (index) Removes the element at that index and shifts later elements toward the 
beginning one space 

 remove(Object) Removes the first occurrence of the Object and shifts later elements 
toward the beginning one space 

I int size( ) Returns the number of elements in the Array List 

To summarize, the OCA 8 exam tests only for very basic knowledge of Ar ray Lists. If you go on to 
take the OCP 8 exam, youll learn a lot more about Array Lists and other common collections-oriented 
classes. 


Autoboxing with ArrayLists 

In general, collections like Ar rayList can hold objects but not primitives. Prior to Java 5, a common use 
for the so-called wrapper classes (e.g., Integer, Float, Boolean, and so on) was to provide a way to 
get primitives into and out of collections. Prior to Java 5, you had to "wrap" a primitive manually before 
you could put it into a collection. As of Java 5, primitives still have to be wrapped before they can be 
added to ArrayLists, but autoboxing takes care of it for you. 

List mylnts = new ArrayListO; // pre Java 5 declaration 

mylnts.add(new Integer(42)); // Use Integer class to "wrap" an int 

In the previous example, we create an instance of class Integer with a value of 42. Weve created an 
entire object to "wrap around" a primitive value. As of Java 5, we can say: 

mylnts.add(42); // autoboxing handles it! 


In this last example, we are still adding an Integer object to mylnts (not an int primitive); its just that 
autoboxing handles the wrapping for us. There are some sneaky implications when we need to use 
wrapper objects; lets take a closer look... 

In the old, pre-Java 5 days, if you wanted to make a wrapper, unwrap it, use it, and then rewrap it, you 
might do something like this: 


Integer y = new Integer(567); 
int x = y.intValue(); 
x+ +; 

y = new Integer(x); 

System.out.println("y = " + y) 

Now you can say: 

Integer y = new Integer(567); 

y++; 

System.out.println("y = " + y) 


// make it 
// unwrap it 
// use it 
// rewrap it 
// print it 


// make it 

// unwrap it, increment it, 
// rewrap it 
// print it 


Both examples produce the following output: 


y = 568 


And yes, you read that correcdy. The code appears to be using the postincrement operator on an object 


reference variable! But its simply a convenience. Behind the scenes, the compiler does the unboxing and 
reassignment for you. Earlier, we mentioned that wrapper objects are immutable... this example appears 
to contradict that statement. It sure looks like y s value changed from 567 to 568. What actually happened, 
however, is that a second wrapper object was created and its value was set to 568. If only we could 
access that first wrapper object, we could prove it.... 

Lets try this: 


Integer y = 567; 

Integer x = y; 

System.out.println(y==x); 


System.out.printIn(y==x); 


// 

make a 

wrapper 

// 

assign 

a second ref 

// 

var to 

THE wrapper 

// 

verify 

that 

they refer 

// 

to the 

same 

obj ect 

// 

unwrap, 

use, 

"rewrap" 

// 

print values 


// 

verify 

that 

they refer 

// 

to different 

obj ects 


y++; 

System.out.println(x + M " + y); 


which produces the output: 

true 

567 568 
false 

So, under the covers, when the compiler got to the line y++; it had to substitute something like this: 

int x2 = y.intValue(); // unwrap it 

x2 + +; // use it 

y = new Integer(x2); // rewrap it 

Just as we suspected, theres gotta be a call to new in there somewhere. 



 a t c h 


All the wrapper classes except Character provide two constructors: one takes a primitive of 
the type being constructed, and the other takes a string representation of the type being 
constructed. For example, 

Integer il = new Integer(42); 

Integer i2 = new Integer("42"); 

are both valid ways to construct a new Integer object (that "wraps " the value 42). 


Boxing, ==, and equals() 

We just used == to do a little exploration of wrappers. Lets take a more thorough look at how wrappers 
work with ==, ! =, and equals (). The API developers decided that for all the wrapper classes, two 
objects are equal if they are of the same type and have the same value. It shouldnt be surprising that 




Integer il = 1000; 

Integer i2 = 1000; 

if(il != i2) System.out.println("different objects"); 

if(il.equals(i2)) System.out.println("meaningfully equal"); 

produces the output 

different objects 
meaningfully equal 

Its just two wrapper objects happen to have the same value. Because they have the same int value, 
the equals () method considers them to be "meaningfully equivalent" and, therefore, returns true. How 
about this one? 

Integer i3 = 10; 

Integer i4 = 10; 

if(i3 == i4) System.out.println("same object"); 

if(i3.equals(i4)) System.out.println("meaningfully equal"); 

This example produces the output: 

same object 
meaningfully equal 

Yikes! The equals () method seems to be working, but what happened with == and ! =? Why is ! = 
telling us that il and i2 are different objects, when == is saying that i3 and i4 are the same object? In 
order to save memory, two instances of the following wrapper objects (created through boxing) will 
always be == when their primitive values are the same: 

; Boolean 
li Byte 

 Character from \u0000 to \u007f (7f is 127 in decimal) 

 Short and Integer from -128 to 127 

When == is used to compare a primitive to a wrapper, the wrapper will be unwrapped and the 
comparison will be primitive to primitive. 

Where Boxing Can Be Used 

As we discussed earlier, its common to use wrappers in conjunction with collections. Any time you want 
your collection to hold objects and primitives, youll want to use wrappers to make those primitives 
collection-compatible. The general rule is that boxing and unboxing work wherever you can normally use 
a primitive or a wrapped object. The following code demonstrates some legal ways to use boxing: 


class UseBoxing { 

public static void main(String [] args) 


UseBoxing u = new UseBoxing 
u.go(5); 

} 

boolean go(Integer i) { 
Boolean ifSo = true; 

Short s = 300; 
if (ifSo) { 

System.out.println( + + s) ; 

} 

return lifSo; 

} 


) ; 

// boxes the int it was passed 
// boxes the literal 
// boxes the primitive 
// unboxing 

// unboxes, increments, reboxes 
// unboxes, returns the inverse 



 a t c h 


Remember, wrapper reference variables can be null. That means you have to watch out for 

code that appears to be doing safe primitive operations but that could throw a 
NullPointerException: 

class Boxing2 { 
static Integer x; 

public static void main(String [] args) { 
doStuff(x); 

} 

static void doStuff(int z) { 
int z2 = 5; 

System.out.println(z2 + z); 

} } 

This code compiles fine, but the JVM throws a NullPointerException when it attempts to 
invoke doStuff(x) because x doesnt refer to an Integer object, so theres no value to unbox. 


The Java 7 "Diamond" Syntax 

Earlier in the book, we discussed several small additions/improvements to the language that were added 
under the name "Project Coin." The last Project Coin improvement well discuss is the "diamond syntax." 
Weve already seen several examples of declaring type-safe Array Lists like this: 

ArrayList<String> stuff = new ArrayList<String>(); 

ArrayList<Dog> myDogs = new ArrayList<Dog>(); 

Notice that the type parameters are duplicated in these declarations. As of Java 7, these declarations 
could be simplified to: 

ArrayList<String> stuff = new ArrayListo(); 

ArrayList<Dog> myDogs = new ArrayList<>(); 

Notice that in the simpler Java 7 declarations, the right side of the declaration included the two characters 




which together make a diamond shapedoh! 

You cannot swap these; for example, the following declaration is NOT legal: 

ArrayListo stuff = new ArrayList<String>(); // NOT a legal diamond syntax 

For the purposes of the exam, thats all youll need to know about the diamond operator. For the 
remainder of the book, well use the pre-diamond syntax and the Java 7 diamond syntax somewhat 
randomlyjust like the real world! 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Advanced Encapsulation (OCA Objective 6.5) 

6.5 Apply encapsulation principles to a class. 


Encapsulation for Reference Variables 

In Chapter 2 we began our discussion of the object-oriented concept of encapsulation. At that point, we 
limited our discussion to protecting a classs primitive fields and (immutable) string fields. Now that 
youve learned more about what it means to "pass-by-copy" and weve looked at nonprimitive ways of 
handling data such as arrays, stringBuilders, and Ar rayLists, its time to take a closer look at 
encapsulation. 

Lets say we have some special data whose value were saving in a stringBuilder. Were happy to 
share the value with other programmers, but we dont want them to change the value: 

class Special { 

private StringBuilder s = new StringBuilder("bob"); 

StringBuilder getNameO { return s; } 
void printNameO { System.out.println(s); } 

} 

public class TestSpecial { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Special sp = new Special(); 

StringBuilder s2 = sp.getName(); 
s2.append("fred"); 
sp.printName(); 

} 

} 

When we run the code, we get this: 
bobfred 

llh oh! It looks like we practiced good encapsulation techniques by making our field private and 
providing a "getter" method, but based on the output, its clear that we didnt do a very good job of 
protecting the data in the Special class. Can you figure out why? Take a minute.... 

Okayjust to verify your answerwhen we invoke getName (), we do, in fact, return a copy, just like 
Java always does. But were not returning a copy of the StringBuilder object; were returning a copy 
of the reference variable that points to (I know) the one and only StringBuilder object we ever built. So 
at the point that getName() returns, we have one StringBuilder object and two reference variables 


// our special data 

// verify our special 
// data 




pointing to it (s and s2). 

For the purpose of the OCA exam, the key point is this: When encapsulating a mutable object like a 
StringBuilder, or an array, or an Array List, if you want to let outside classes have a copy of the 
object, you must actually copy the object and return a reference variable to the object that is a copy. If all 
you do is return a copy of the original objects reference variable, you DO NOT have encapsulation. 


CERTIFICATION OBJECTIVE 


Using Simple Lambdas (OCA Objective 9.5) 

9.5 Write a simple Lambda expression that consumes a Lambda Predicate expression. 

Java 8 is probably best known as the version of Java that finally added lambdas and streams. These 
two new features (lambdas and streams) give programmers tools to tackle some common and complex 
problems with easier-to-read, more concise, and, in many cases, faster-running code. The creators of the 
OCA 8 exam felt that, in general, lambdas and streams are topics more appropriate for the OCP 8 exam, 
but they wanted OCA 8 candidates to get an introduction, perhaps to whet their appetite... 

In this section, were going to do a really basic introduction to lambdas. We suspect this discussion 
will raise some questions in your mind, and were sorry for that, but were going to restrict ourselves to 
just the introduction that the exam creators had in mind. 



 a t c h 


On the real exam, you should expect to see many questions that test for more than one 
objective. In the following pages, as we discuss lambdas, well be leaning heavily on 
ArrayLists and wrapper classes. Youll see that we combine ArrayLists, wrappers, AND 
lambdas into many of our code listings, and we also use this combination in the mock exam 
questions we provide. The real exam (and real-life programming) will do the same. 


Suppose youre creating an application for a veterinary hospital. We want to focus on that part of the 
application that allows the vets to get summary information about all the dogs that they work with. Heres 
our Dog class: 





class Dog { 

String name; 
int weight; 
int age; 

// constructor assigns a name, weight and age 
Dog(String name, int weight, int age) { 
this.name = name; 
this.weight = weight; 
this.age = age; 

} 

String getNameO {return name;} 
int getWeightO { return weight;} 
int getAge() { return age;} 
public String toStringO { 
return name; 

} 

} 

Now lets write some test code to create some sample Dogs, put them into an Array List as we go, and 
then run some "queries" against the Array List. 

First heres the summary pseudo code: 

// create and populate an ArrayList of Dog objects 
// invoke a few "queries" on the ArrayList 
// declare a couple of "query" methods 

Heres the actual test code: 

import java.util.*; 
public class TestDogs { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

ArrayList<Dog> dogs = new ArrayListo(); // create and populate 

dogs.add(new Dog("boi", 30, 6)); dogs.add(new DogC'tyri", 40, 12)); 
dogs.add(new Dog("charis", 120, 7)); dogs.add(new Dog("aiko", 50, 10)); 
dogs.add(new Dog("clover", 35, 12)); dogs.add(new Dog( n mia", 15, 4)); 
dogs.add(new Dog("zooey", 45, 8)); 

// run a few "queries" 

System.out.println("all dogs " + dogs); 

System.out.println("min age 7 " + minAge(dogs, 7).toString()); 

System.out.println("max wght. " + maxWeight(dogs,40).toString()); 

} 

// declare "query" methods 

static ArrayList<Dog> minAge(ArrayList<Dog> dogList, int testFor) { 

ArrayList<Dog> resultl = new ArrayList<>(); // do a minimum age query 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if(d.getAge() >= testFor) // the key moment! 

resultl.add(d); 
return resultl; 

} 

static ArrayList<Dog> maxWeight(ArrayList<Dog> dogList, int testFor) { 

ArrayList<Dog> resultl = new ArrayListo () ; // do a max weight query 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if(d.getWeight() <= testFor) 

resultl.add(d); 
return resultl; 


// the key moment! 


which produces the following (predictable we hope) output: 

all dogs [boi, tyri, charis, aiko, clover, mia, zooey] 

min age 7 [tyri, charis, aiko, clover, zooey] 

max wght. [boi, tyri, clover, mia] 

Youre probably way ahead of us here, but notice how similar the minAge() and maxWeight () 
methods are. And it should be easy to imagine other similar methods with names like maxAge () or 
namesStartingWithC(). So the line of code we want to focus on is: 

if( d.getAgeO >= testFor ) // the query expression is in bold 

What ifjust sayinwe could create a single Dog-querying method (instead of the many weve been 
contemplating) and pass it the query expression we wanted it to use? It would sort of look like this: 

static ArrayList<Dog> dogQuerier(ArrayList<Dog> dogList, // query expression) { 

// do an "on the fly" query 

ArrayList<Dog> resultl = new ArrayList<>(); 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if( // query expression ) // the key moment! 

result1.add(d); 
return resultl; 

} 

Now were thinking about passing code as an argument? Lambdas let us do just that! Lets look at our 
dogQuerier () method a little more closely. First off, the code were going to pass in is going to be used 
as the expression in an if statement. What do we know about if expressions? Right! They have to 
resolve to a boolean value. So when we declare our method, the second argument (the one thats going to 
hold the passed-in-code) has to be declared as a boolean. The folks who brought us Java 8 and lambdas 
and streams provided a bunch of new interfaces in the API, and one of the most useful of these is the 
java. util. function . Predicate interface. The Predicate interface has some of those new-fangled 
static and default interface methods, we discussed earlier in the book, and, most importandy for us, it 
has one nonconcrete method called test() that returnsyou guessed ita boolean. 

Heres the multipurpose dogQuerier() method: 

static ArrayList<Dog> dogQuerier(ArrayList<Dog> dogList, Predicate<Dog> expr) { 

// do an "on the fly" query 

ArrayList<Dog> resultl = new ArrayListo () ; 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if( expr.test(d) ) // the key moment! 

result1.add(d); 
return resultl; 

} 

So far this looks like good-old Java; its when we invoke dogQuerier () that the syntax gets 
interesting: 

dogQuerier (dogs, d -> d.getAgeO < 9); 

When we say [c]d -> d.getAge() < 9[/c]THAT is the lambda expression. The d represents the 
argument, and then the code must return a boolean. Lets put all of this together in a new version of 
TestDogs: 


import java.util.*; 

import java.util.function.Predicate; 
public class TestDogs { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

ArrayList<Dog> dogs = new ArrayListo () ; // create and populate 

dogs, add (new Dog("boi", 30 # 6)); dogs, add (new Dog("tyri", 40, 12)); 
dogs.add(new Dog("charis", 120, 7)); dogs.add(new DogC'aiko", 50, 10)); 
dogs.add(new Dog("clover", 35, 12)); dogs.add(new Dog("mia", 15, 4)); 
dogs, add (new DogC'zooey", 45, 8) ) ; 

// run a few old "queries" 

System.out.printIn("all dogs " + dogs); 

System.out.println("min age 7 " + minAgefdogs, 7).toString()); 

System.out.printIn("max wght. " + maxWeight(dogs,40).toString()); 

// run a few lambda queries 
System.out.println("age <9 " + dogQuery(dogs, d -> d.getAgeO < 9)); 

System.out.println("w > 100 " + dogQuery(dogs, d -> d.getWeight() > 100)); 

} 

// declare old style "query" methods 

static ArrayList<Dog> minAge(ArrayList<Dog> dogList, int testFor) { 

// do a minimum age query 

ArrayList<Dog> result 1 = new ArrayListo () ; 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if(d.getAge() >= testFor) // the key moment! 

resultl.add(d); 
return resultl; 

} 

static ArrayList<Dog> maxWeight(ArrayList<Dog> dogList, int testFor) { 

// do a max weight query 

ArrayList<Dog> resultl = new ArrayListo () ; 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if(d.getWeight() <= testFor) // the key moment! 

resultl.add(d); 
return resultl; 

} 

// declare a new lambda powered, generic, multi-purpose query method 
static ArrayList< >Dog> dogQuery(ArrayList< >Dog> dogList, Predicate< >Dog> expr) { 
// do an "on the fly" query 

ArrayList< >Dog> resultl = new ArrayList< >>(); 
for(Dog d: dogList) 

if(expr.test(d)) // the key moment, lambda powered! 

resultl.add(d); 
return resultl; 

} 

} 

which produces the following output (the last two lines generated using lambdas!): 

all dogs [boi, tyri, charis, aiko, clover, mia, zooey] 

min age 7 [tyri, charis, aiko, clover, zooey] 
max wght. [boi, tyri, clover, mia] 
age < > 9 [boi, charis, mia, zooey] 
w > 100 [charis] 


Lets step back now and cover some syntax rules. The following rules are for the purposes of the OCA 
8 exam only! If you decide to earn your OCP 8, youll do a much deeper dive into lambdas, and there are 
lots of "cans of worms" youll have to open, which were purposely going to avoid. So what follows is an 


OCA 8 appropriate simplification. 

The basic syntax for a Predicate lambda has three parts: 


A Single Parameter An Arrow-Token A Body 

x 7 < > 5 


Other types of lambdas take zero or more parameters, but for the OCA 8, were focused exclusively on 
the Predicate, which must take exacdy one parameter. Here are some detailed syntax rules for 
Predicate lambdas: 


ft The parameter can be just a variable name, or it can be the type followed by a variable name 
all in parentheses. 

ft The body MUST (one way or another) return a boolean. 

I The body can be a single expression, which cannot have a return statement. 

n The body can be a code block surrounded by curly braces, containing one or more valid 
statements, each ending with a semicolon, and the block must end with a r e t u r n statement. 


Following is a code listing that shows examples of legal and then illegal examples of Predicate 
lambdas: 


import java.util.function.Predicate; // type of lambda 

// we're learning 

public class Lamb2 { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Lamb2 ml = new Lamb2(); 

// ==== LEGAL LAMBDAS ======================== 


ml.go(x -> 7 

< 5) ; 




II 

extra terse 

ml.go(x -> { 

return 

adder(2, 1) >5; 

}) 

1 

// 

block 

ml.go((Lamb2 

x) -> 

{ int y = 5; 







return adder(y, 

7) 

> 8 ; } ) ; 

II 

multi-stmt block 

ml.go(x -> { 

int y= 

5; return adder(y,6) 

> 8 ; } ) ; 

II 

no arg type, block 

int a = 5; int b = 

6; 





ml.go(x -> { 

return 

adder(a, b) > 8; 

}) 

f 

II 

in scope vars 

ml.go((Lamb2 

x) -> 

adder(a, b) > 13), 

t 


II 

arg type, no block 


// ==== ILLEGAL LAMBDAS 


// ml.go(x -> return adder(2, 1) > 5; ); 

// ml.go(Lamb2 x -> adder(2, 3) > 7); 

// ml.go(() -> adder(2, 3) > 7) ; 

// ml.go(x -> { adder(4, 2) > 9 }); 

// ml.go(x -> { int y = 5; adder(y, 7) > 8; }); 

} 

void go(Predicate<Lamb2> e) { 

Lamb2 m2 = new Lamb2(); 

System.out.println(e.test(m2) ? "ternary true" 

: "ternary false" 

} 

static int adder(int x, int y) { return x + y; } 

} 


// return w/o block 
// type needs parens 
// Predicate needs 1 arg 
// blocks need statements 
// block needs return 

// go() takes a predicate 

// ternary uses boolean expr 

// complex calculation 








This code is mostly about valid and invalid syntax, but lets look a little more closely at the go () method. 
The test is mainly concerned with the code to be passed to a method, but its useful to look (but not TOO 
closely) at a method that receives lambda code. In both the Dogs code and the code direcdy above, the 
receiving method took a Predicate. Inside the receiving methods, we created an object of the type were 
working with, which we pass to the Predicate. test () method. The receiving method expects the 
test () method to return a boolean. 

We have to admit that lambdas are a bit tricky to learn. Again, we expect weve left you with some 
unanswered questions, but we think Oracle did a reasonable job of slicing out a piece of the lambda 
puzzle to start with. If you understand the bits weve covered, you should be able to handle the lambda- 
related questions Oracle throws you. 


CERTIFICATION SUMMARY 

The most important thing to remember about strings is that string objects are immutable, but 
references to Strings are not! You can make a new string by using an existing string as a starting 
point, but if you dont assign a reference variable to the new St ring, it will be lost to your programyou 
will have no way to access your new String. Review the important methods in the String class. 

The stringBuilder class was added in Java 5. It has exacdy the same methods as the old 
StringBuffer class, except StringBuilders methods arent thread-safe. Because stringBuilders 
methods are not thread-safe, they tend to run faster than StringBuffer methods, so choose 
StringBuilder whenever threading is not an issue. Both StringBuffer and StringBuilder objects 
can have their value changed over and over without your having to create new objects. If youre doing a 
lot of string manipulation, these objects will be more efficient than immutable string objects, which are, 
more or less, "use once, remain in memory forever." Remember, these methods ALWAYS change the 
invoking objects value, even with no explicit assignment. 

Next we discussed key classes and interfaces in the new Java 8 calendar and time-related packages. 
Similar to Strings, all of the calendar classes we studied create immutable objects. In addition, these 
classes use factory methods exclusively to create new objects. The keyword new cannot be used with 
these classes. We looked at some of the powerful features of these classes, like calculating the amount of 
time between two different dates or times. Then we took a look at how the DateTimeFormatter class is 
used to parse Strings into calendar objects and how it is used to beautify calendar objects. 

The next topic was arrays. We talked about declaring, constructing, and initializing one-dimensional 
and multidimensional arrays. We talked about anonymous arrays and the fact that arrays of objects are 
actually arrays of references to objects. 

Next, we discussed the basics of Array Lists. Array Lists are like arrays with superpowers that 
allow them to grow and shrink dynamically and to make it easy for you to insert and delete elements at 
locations of your choosing within the list. We discussed the idea that Array Lists cannot hold primitives, 
and that if you want to make an Array List filled with a given type of primitive values, you use 
"wrapper" classes to turn a primitive value into an object that represents that value. Then we discussed 
how with autoboxing, turning primitives into wrapper objects, and vice versa, is done automatically. 

Finally, we discussed a specific subset of the topic of lambdas, using the Predicate interface. The 
basic idea of lambdas is that you can pass a bit of code from one method to another. The Predicate 
interface is one of many "functional interfaces" provided in the Java 8 API. A functional interface is one 
that has only one method to be implemented. In the case of the Predicate interface, this method is called 
test (), and it takes a single argument and returns a boolean. To wrap up our discussion of lambdas, we 




covered some of the tricky syntax rules you need to know to write valid lambdas. 


/ TWO-MINUTE DRILL 

Here are some of the key points from the certification objectives in this chapter. 

Using String and StringBuilder (OCA Objectives 9.2 and 9.1) 

? string objects are immutable, and string reference variables are not. 

? If you create a new string without assigning it, it will be lost to your program 

? If you redirect a string reference to a new String, the old string can be lost. 

? String methods use zero-based indexes, except for the second argument ofsubstring(). 

? The string class is finalit cannot be extended. 

? When the JVM finds a string literal, it is added to the string literal pool. 

? Strings have a method called length ()arrays have an attribute named length. 

? StringBuilder objects are mutablethey can change without creating a new object. 

? StringBuilder methods act on the invoking object, and objects can change without an 
explicit assignment in the statement. 

? Remember that chained methods are evaluated from left to right. 

? String methods to remember: charAt( ), concat( ), equalsIgnoreCase( ), length (), 
replace!), substring!), toLowercase!), toString(), toUpperCase(), and trim(). 

? StringBuilder methods to remember: append! ), delete! ), insert! ), reverse! ), and 
toString(). 


Manipulating Calendar Data (OCA Objective 9.3) 

? On the exam all the objects created using the calendar classes are immutable, but their 
reference variables are not. 

? If you create a new calendar object without assigning it, it will be lost to your program 

? If you redirect a calendar reference to a new calendar object, the old calendar object can be 
lost. 

? All of the objects created using the exams calendar classes must be created using factory 
methods (e.g., from(), now(), of (), parse!)); the keyword new is not allowed. 

? The until! ) and between! ) methods perform complex calculations that determine the 
amount of time between the values of two calendar objects. 

? The DateTimeFormatter class uses the parse! ) method to parse input Strings into valid 
calendar objects. 

? The DateTimeFormatter class uses the format! ) method to format calendar objects into 
beautifully formed Strings. 



Using Arrays (OCA Objectives 4.1 and 4.2) 

? Arrays can hold primitives or objects, but the array itself is always an object. 

? When you declare an array, the brackets can be to the left or right of the name. 

? It is never legal to include the size of an array in the declaration. 

? You must include the size of an array when you construct it (using new) unless you are creating 
an anonymous array. 

? Elements in an array of objects are not automatically created, although primitive array 
elements are given default values. 

? Youll get a NullPointerException if you try to use an array element in an object array if 
that element does not refer to a real object. 

? Arrays are indexed beginning with zero. 

? An ArraylndexOutOf BoundsException occurs if you use a bad index value. 

? Arrays have a length attribute whose value is the number of array elements. 

? The last index you can access is always one less than the length of the array. 

? Multidimensional arrays are just arrays of arrays. 

? The dimensions in a multidimensional array can have different lengths. 

? An array of primitives can accept any value that can be promoted implicidy to the arrays 
declared typefor example, a byte variable can go in an int array. 

? An array of objects can hold any object that passes the IS-A (or instanceof ) test for the 
declared type of the array. For example, if Horse extends Animal, then a Horse object can go into 
an Animal array. 

? If you assign an array to a previously declared array reference, the array youre assigning 
must be the same dimension as the reference youre assigning it to. 

? You can assign an array of one type to a previously declared array reference of one of its 
supertypes. For example, a Honda array can be assigned to an array declared as type Car (assuming 
Honda extends Car). 

Using ArrayList (OCA Objective 9.4) 

? Array Lists allow you to resize your list and make insertions and deletions to your list far 
more easily than arrays. 

? Array Lists are ordered by default. When you use the add () method with no index argument, 
the new entry will be appended to the end of the ArrayList. 

? For the OCA 8 exam, the only ArrayList declarations you need to know are of this form: 

ArrayList<type> myList = new ArrayList<type>(); 

List<type> myList2 = new ArrayList<type>(); // polymorphic 

List<type> myList3 = new ArrayListo(); // diamond operator, polymorphic 

optional 

? Array Lists can hold only objects, not primitives, but remember that autoboxing can make it 
look like youre adding primitives to an ArrayList when, in fact, youre adding a wrapper object 
version of a primitive. 



? An Array Lists index starts at 0. 

? Array Lists can have duplicate entries. Note: Determining whether two objects are 
duplicates is trickier than it seems and doesnt come up until the OCP 8 exam. 

? Array List methods to remember: add (element), add (index, element), clear (), 
contains(object), get(index), indexOf(object), remove(index), remove(object),and 
size(). 


Encapsulating Reference Variables (OCA Objective 6.5) 

? If you want to encapsulate mutable objects like stringBuilders or arrays or ArrayLists, 
you cannot return a reference to these objects; you must first make a copy of the object and return a 
reference to the copy. 

? Any class that has a method that returns a reference to a mutable object is breaking 
encapsulation. 

Using Predicate Lambda Expressions (OCA Objective 9.5) 

? Lambdas allow you to pass bits of code from one method to another. And the receiving 
method can run whatever complying code it is sent. 

? While there are many types of lambdas that Java 8 supports, for this exam, the only lambda 
type you need to know is the Predicate. 

? The Predicate interface has a single method to implement thats called test (), and it takes 
one argument and returns a boolean. 

? As the Predicate. test ( ) method returns a boolean, it can be placed (mosdy?) wherever a 
boolean expression can go, e.g., in if, while, do, and ternary statements. 

? Predicate lambda expressions have three parts: a single argument, an arrow (->), and an 
expression or code block. 

? A Predicate lambda expressions argument can be just a variable or a type and variable 
together in parentheses, e.g., (MyClass m). 

? A Predicate lambda expressions body can be an expression that resolves to a boolean, OR 
it can be a block of statements (surrounded by curly braces) that ends with a boolean-returning 
return statement. 


SELF TEST 


1. Given: 

public class Mutant { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder("abc"); 
String s = "abc"; 
sb.reverse().append("d"); 
s.toUpperCase().concat("d"); 

System.out.println(" + sb + " . ." + s + " . "); 

} 

} 


Which two substrings will be included in the result? (Choose two.) 

A. . abc. 

B. . ABCd. 

C. .ABCD. 

D. . cbad. 

E. . dcba. 

2. Given: 

public class Hilltop { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

String[] horses = new String[5]; 
horses[4] = null; 

for(int i = 0; i < horses.length; i++) { 

if(i < args.length) 
horses [i] = args [i] ; 

System.out.print(horses[i].toUpperCase() + " "); 

} 

} 

} 

And, if the code compiles, the command line: 
java Hilltop eyra vafi draumur kara 

What is the result? 

A. EYRA VAFI DRAUMUR KARA 

B. EYRA VAFI DRAUMUR KARA null 

C. An exception is thrown with no other output 

D. EYRA VAFI DRAUMUR KARA, and then a NullPointerException 

E. EYRA VAFI DRAUMUR KARA, and then an ArraylndexOutOf BoundsException 

F. Compilation fails 

3. Given: 

public class Actors { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
char [] ca = {0x4e, \u004e, 78}; 

System.out .println ( (ca [0] == ca[l] ) + " " + (ca[0] == ca[2])); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. true true 

B. true false 

C. false true 

D. false false 

E. Compilation fails 

4. Given: 


1. class Dims { 

2. public static void main(String[] args) { 

3. int [] [] a = {{l,2}, {3,4}}; 

4. int[] b = (int[]) a[l]; 

5. Object ol = a; 

6. int [] [] a2 = (int[] [] ) ol; 

7. int [] b2 = (int[]) ol; 

8. System.out.println(b[1]); 

9 - } } 

What is the result? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. 2 

B. 4 

C. An exception is thrown at runtime 

D. Compilation fails due to an error on line 4 

E. Compilation fails due to an error on line 5 

F. Compilation fails due to an error on line 6 

G. Compilation fails due to an error on line 7 

5. Given: 

import j ava.uti1.*; 
public class Sequence { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

ArrayList<String> myList = new ArrayList<String>(); 

myList.add("apple"); 

myList.add("carrot"); 

myList.add("banana"); 

myList.add(1, "plum"); 

System.out.print(myList); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. [apple, banana, carrot, plum] 

B. [apple, plum, carrot, banana] 

C. [apple, plum, banana, carrot] 

D. [plum, banana, carrot, apple] 

E. [plum, apple, carrot, banana] 

F. [banana, plum, carrot, apple] 

G. Compilation fails 

6. Given: 


3. class Dozens { 

4. int[] dz = {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12}; 

5- } 

6. public class Eggs { 

7. public static void main(String[] args) { 

8. Dozens [] da = new Dozens [3] ; 

9. da[0] = new Dozens () ; 

10. Dozens d = new DozensO ; 

11. da[1] = d; 

12. d = null; 

13. da[1] = null; 

14. // do stuff 

15. } 

16. } 

Which two are true about the objects created within main (), and which are eligible for garbage 
collection when line 14 is reached? 

A. Three objects were created 

B. Four objects were created 

C. Five objects were created 

D. Zero objects are eligible for GC 

E. One object is eligible for GC 

F. Two objects are eligible for GC 

G. Three objects are eligible for GC 

7. Given: 

public class Tailor { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 
byte [] [] ba = {{l,2,3,4}, {l,2,3}}; 

System.out.println(ba[1].length + " " + ba.length); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. 2 4 

B. 2 7 

C. 3 2 

D. 3 7 

E. 4 2 

F. 4 7 

G. Compilation fails 

8. Given: 


3 . 

public class Theory { 


4 . 

public static void main(String[] args) 

{ 

5 . 

String si = "abc"; 


6 . 

String s2 = si; 


7 . 

si += "d"; 


8 . 

Q 

System.out.printIn(si + " " + s2 + " 

" + (sl==s2)); 

. 

10 . 

StringBuilder sbl = new StringBuilder( "abc"); 

11. 

StringBuilder sb2 = sbl; 


12 . 

sbl.append("d"); 


13 . 

System.out.printIn(sbl + M " + sb2 + 

" " + (sbl==sb2)); 

14 . 

} 


15 . 

} 



Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Compilation fails 

B. The first line of output isabc abc true 

C. The first line of output is abc abc false 

D. The first line of output is abed abc false 

E. The second line of output is abed abc false 

F. The second line of output is abed abed true 

G. The second line of output is abed abed false 
9. Given: 

public class Mounds { 
public static void main(String[] args) { 

StringBuilder sb = new StringBuilder(); 

String s = new String(); 
for(int i = 0; i < 1000; i++) { 

s = " " + i ; 
sb.append(s) ; 

} 

// done with loop 

} 

} 

If the garbage collector does NOT run while this code is executing, approximately how many 
objects will exist in memory when the loop is done? 

A. Less than 10 

B. About 1000 

C. About 2000 

D. About 3000 

E. About 4000 


10 . Given: 


3. class Box { 

4. int size; 

5. Box(int s) { size = s; } 

6 . } 

7. public class Laser { 

8. public static void main(String[] args) { 

9. Box bl = new Box(5); 

10. Box[] ba = go(bl, new Box(6)); 

11. ba[0] = bl; 

12. for(Box b : ba) System.out.print(b.size + " "); 

13. } 

14. static Box[] go (Box bl, Box b2) { 

15. bl.size = 4; 

16. Box[] ma = {b2, bl}; 

17. return ma; 

18. } 

19. } 

What is the result? 

A. 4 4 

B. 5 4 

C. 6 4 

D. 4 5 

E. 5 5 

F. Compilation fails 
11. Given: 

public class Hedges { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

String s = "JAVA"; 
s = s + "rocks"; 
s = s.substring(4,8); 
s.toUpperCase(); 

System.out.println(s); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. JAVA 

B. JAVAROCKS 

C. rocks 

D. rock 

E. ROCKS 

F. ROCK 

G. Compilation fails 


12 . Given: 


1. import java.util.*; 

2. class Fortress { 

3. private String name; 

4. private ArrayList<Integer> list; 

5. Fortress() { list = new ArrayList<Integer>(); } 

6 . 

7. String getNameO { return name; } 

8. void addToList(int x) { list.add(x); } 

9. ArrayList getListO { return list; } 

10 . } 

Which lines of code (if any) break encapsulation? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. Line 3 

B. Line 4 

C. Line 5 

D. Line 7 

E. Line 8 

F. Line 9 

G. The class is already well encapsulated 
13. Given: 

import java.util.function.Predicate; 
public class Sheep { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

Sheep s = new Sheep(); 

s.go(() -> adder(5, 1) < 7); // line A 

s.go(x -> adder(6, 2) < 9); // line B 

s.go(x, y -> adder(3, 2) < 4); // line C 

} 

void go(Predicate<Sheep> e) { 

Sheep s2 = new Sheep(); 
if (e.test(s2)) 

System.out.print("true "); 
else 

System.out.print("false "); 

} 

static int adder(int x, int y) { 
return x + y; 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. true true false 

B. Compilation fails due only to an error at line A 

C. Compilation fails due only to an error at line B 

D. Compilation fails due only to an error at line C 

E. Compilation fails due only to errors at lines A and B 

F. Compilation fails due only to errors at lines A and C 

G. Compilation fails due only to errors at lines A, B, and C 


H. Compilation fails for reasons not listed 

14. Given: 

import j ava.time.*; 
import j ava.time.format.*; 
public class Shiny { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

DateTimeFormatter fl = 

DateTimeFormatter.ofPattern("MMM dd, yyyy"); 

LocalDate d = LocalDate.of(2018, Month.JANUARY, 15); 

LocalDate d2 = d.plusDays(1); 

System.out.print(fl.format(d) + " ") ; 

System.out.printIn(d2.format(f1)); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. 2018-01-15 2018-01-15 

B. 2018-01-15 2018-01-16 

C. Jan 15, 2018 Jan 15, 2018 

D. Jan 15, 2018 Jan 16, 2018 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 

15. Given: 

import j ava.util.*; 
public class Jackets { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

List<Integer> myList = new ArrayListo(); // line 5 

myList.add(new Integer(5) ) ; 

myList.add(42); // line 7 

myList.add("113"); // line 8 

myList.add(new Integer("7")); // line 9 

System.out.printIn(myList); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 

A. [5, 42, 113, 7] 

B. Compilation fails due only to an error on line 5 

C. Compilation fails due only to an error on line 8 

D. Compilation fails due only to errors on lines 5 and 8 

E. Compilation fails due only to errors on lines 7 and 8 

F. Compilation fails due only to errors on lines 5, 7, and 8 

G. Compilation fails due only to errors on lines 5, 7, 8, and 9 

16. Given that adder () returns an int, which are valid Predicate lambdas? (Choose all that apply.) 


> 


A. 

X, 

y 

-> 7 < 5 

B. 

X 

- > 

{ return adder(2, 1) 

C. 

X 

- > 

return adder(2, 1) > 

D. 

X 

- > 

{ int y = 5; 


int z = 7; 

adder(y, z) >8; } 


E. x - > { int y = 5 ; 

int z = 7; 
return adder(y, z) 

F. (MyClass x) -> 7 > 13 

G. (MyClass x) -> 5 + 4 


> 8 ; 


} 


} 


17. Given: 


import j ava.uti1.*; 
public class Baking { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

ArrayList<String> steps = new ArrayList<String>(); 

steps.add("knead"); 

steps.add("oil pan"); 

steps.add("turn on oven"); 

steps.add("roll"); 

steps.add("turn on oven"); 

steps.add("bake"); 

System.out.println(steps); 

} 

} 

What is the result? 


A. [knead, oil pan, roll, turn on oven, bake] 

B. [knead, oil pan, turn on oven, roll, bake] 

C. [knead, oil pan, turn on oven, roll, turn on oven, bake] 

D. The output is unpredictable 

E. Compilation fails 

F. An exception is thrown at runtime 


18. Given: 

import j ava.time.*; 
public class Bachelor { 

public static void main(String[] args) { 

LocalDate d = LocalDate.of(2018, 8, 15); 

d = d.plusDays(1); 

LocalDate d2 = d.plusDays(1); 

LocalDate d3 = d2; 
d2 = d2.plusDays(1); 

System.out.println(d + " " + d2 + " " + d3); // line X 

} 


} 


Which are true? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. The output is: 2018-08-16 2018-08-17 2018-08-18 

B. The output is: 2018-08-16 2018-08-18 2018-08-17 

C. The output is: 2018-08-16 2018-08-17 2018-08-17 

D. At line X, zero LocalDate objects are eligible for garbage collection 

E. At line X, one LocalDate object is eligible for garbage collection 

F. At line X, two LocalDate objects are eligible for garbage collection 

G. Compilation fails 

19 . Given that e refers to an object that implements Predicate, which could be valid code snippets or 
statements? (Choose all that apply.) 

A. if(e . test(m)) 

B. switch (e.test(m)) 

C. while(e.test(m) ) 

D. e.test(m) ? "yes" : "no"; 

E. do {} while(e . test(m) ); 

F. System.out.print(e.test(m)); 

G. boolean b = e.test(m)); 

SELF TEST ANSWERS 

1. 0 A and D are correct. The string operations are working on a new (lost) string not 
String s. The StringBuilder operations work from left to right. 

3 B, C, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 9.2 and 9.1) 

2. 0 D is correct. The horses arrays first four elements contain Strings, but the fifth is null, 
so the toUpperCase( ) invocation for the fifth element throws a NullPointerException. 

3 A, B, C, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 4.1 and 1.3) 

3. 0 E is correct. The Unicode declaration must be enclosed in single quotes: ' \u004e ' . If this 
were done, the answer would be A, but that equality isnt on the OCA exam 

3 A, B, C, and D are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 2.1 and 4.1) 

4. 0 C is correct. AelassCastException is thrown at line 7 because ol refers to an int [] [], 
not an int [ ]. If line 7 were removed, the output would be 4. 

3 A, B, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 4.2) 

5. 0 B is correct. Array List elements are automatically inserted in the order of entry; they are 
not automatically sorted. Array Lists use zero-based indexes, and the last add () inserts a new 
element and shifts the remaining elements back. 

3 A, C, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 9.4) 

6. 0 C and F are correct, da refers to an object of type "Dozens array," and each Dozens object 


that is created comes with its own "int array" object. When line 14 is reached, only the second 
Dozens object (and its "int array" object) are not reachable. 

S3 A, B, D, E, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 4.1 and 2.4) 

7. 0 C is correct. A two-dimensional array is an "array of arrays." The length of ba is 2 because 
it contains 2 one-dimensional arrays. Array indexes are zero-based, so ba[l] refers to bas second 
array. 

S3 A, B, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 4.2) 

8. 0 D and F are correct. Although string objects are immutable, references to Strings are 
mutable. The code si += "d" ; creates a new string object. stringBuilder objects are mutable, 
so the append ( ) is changing the single StringBuilder object to which both StringBuilder 
references refer. 

S3 A, B, C, E, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 9.2 and 9.1) 

9. 0B is correct. stringBuilders are mutable, so all of the append ( ) invocations are acting 
on the same StringBuilder object over and over, strings, however, are immutable, so every 
String concatenation operation results in a new string object. Also, the string " " is created 
once and reused in every loop iteration. 

S3 A, C, D, and E are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 9.2 and 9.1) 

10. 0 A is correct. Although main ()s bl is a different reference variable than go ()s bl, they 
refer to the same Box object. 

3 B, C, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 4.1, 6.1, and 6.6) 

11 . 0D is correct. The substring () invocation uses a zero-based index and the second 
argument is exclusive, so the character at index 8 is NOT included. The toUpperCase( ) invocation 
makes a new string object that is instandy lost. The toUpperCase( ) invocation does NOT affect 
the string referred to by s. 

S3 A, B, C, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 9.2) 

12. 0 F is correct. When encapsulating a mutable object like an Array List, your getter must 
return a reference to a copy of the object, not just the reference to the original object. 

S3 A, B, C, D, E, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 6.5) 

13. 0 F is correct. Predicate lambdas take exacdy one parameter; the rest of the code is correct. 

S3 A, B, C, D, E, G, and H are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 9.5) 

14. 0 D is correct. Invoking the plusDays( ) method creates a new object, and both LocalDate 
and DateTimeFormatter have format () methods. 

S3 A, B, C, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 9.3) 

15. 0 C is correct. The only error in this code is attempting to add a String to an Array List of 
Integer wrapper objects. Line 7 uses autoboxing, and lines 6 and 9 demonstrate using a wrapper 
classs two constructors. 

S3 A, B, D, E, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 2.5 and 9.4) 


16. 0 B, E and F use correct syntax. 

S A, C, D, and G are incorrect. A passes two parameters. C, areturn, must be in a code block, 
and code blocks must be in curly braces. D, a block, must have a return statement. G, the result, is 
not a boolean. (OCA Objective 9.5) 

17. 0 C is correct. ArrayLists can have duplicate entries. 

3 A, B, D, E, and F are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objective 9.4) 

18. 0 B and E are correct. A total of four LocalDate objects are created, but the one created 
using the of () method is abandoned on the next line of code when its reference variable is assigned 
to the new LocalDate object created via the first plusDays( ) invocation. The reference variables 
are swapped a bit, which accounts for the dates not printing in chronological order. 

3 A, C, D, F, and G are incorrect based on the above. (OCA Objectives 2.4 and 9.3) 

19. 0 A, C, D, E, F, and G are correct; they all require a boolean. 

SB is incorrect. A switch doesnt take a boolean. (OCA Objective 9.5) 




A 

About the Download 


This e-book comes with free downloadable Oracle Press Practice Exam Software, which can be 
downloaded using the links provided in this appendix. This software is easy to install on any Mac or 
Windows computer and must be installed to access the Practice Exam feature. 


System Requirements 

Windows 

 2.33GHz or faster x86-compatible processor, or Intel Atom 1.6GHz or faster processor for 
netbook class devices 

 Microsoft Windows Server 2008, Windows 7, Windows 8.1 Classic or Windows 10 

 512MB of RAM (1GB recommended) 


Mac OS 

 Intel Core Duo 1.83GHz or faster processor 

 Mac OS X vl0.7 and above 

 512MB of RAM (1GB recommended) 


Downloading from McGraw-Hill Professionals Media 
Center 

To download the glossary, additional content, and Oracle Press Practice Exam Software, visit McGraw- 
Hill Professionals Media Center by clicking the link below and entering this e-books ISBN and your e- 
mail address. You will then receive an e-mail message with a download link for the additional content. 

http://mhprofessional.com/mediacenter 

This e-books ISBN is 1260011380. 

Once youve received the e-mail message from McGraw-Hill Professionals Media Center, click the 
link included to download the practice exams. If you do not receive the e-mail, be sure to check your 
spam folder. 


Installing the Practice Exam Software 


Follow the instructions below for Windows or Mac OS. 


Windows 

Step 1 Open the InstallerforPC.zip file. You will need to unzip the file and extract or copy and paste the 
contents to your hard drive. 

Step 2 Locate the Installer.exe file and double click the file. After a few moments, the installer will open. 
Step 3 Follow the onscreen instructions to install the application. 

Mac OS 

Step 1 Open the InstallerforMac.zip file. You will need to unzip the file and extract or copy and paste the 
contents to your hard drive. 

Step 2 After a few moments, the contents of the .zip file will be displayed. 

Step 3 Double click on Installer to begin installation. 

Step 4 Follow the onscreen instructions to install the application. 

NOTE: If you get an error while installing the software please ensure your anti-virus or internet security 
programs are disabled and try installing the software again. You may enable the antivirus or internet 
security program again after installation is complete. 


Running the Practice Exam Software 

Follow the instructions below after you have completed the software installation. 

Windows 

After installing, you can start the application using either of the two methods below: 

1. Double-click the Oracle Press Java SE 8 Practice icon on your desktop, or 

2. Go to the Start menu and click Programs or All Programs. Click Oracle Press Java SE 8 
Practice to start the application. 

Mac OS 

Open the Oracle Press Java SE 8 Practice folder inside your Macs application folder and double-click 
the Oracle Press Java SE 8 Practice icon to run the application. 


Practice Exam Software Features 

The Practice Exam Software provides you with a simulation of the actual exam The software also 
features a custom mode that can be used to generate quizzes by exam objective domain. Quiz mode is the 
default mode. To launch an exam simulation, select one of the OCA exam buttons at the top of the screen, 
or check the Exam Mode check box at the bottom of the screen and select the OCA exam in the custom 
window. 

The number of questions, types of questions, and the time allowed on the exam simulation are intended 



to be a representation of the live exam. The custom exam mode includes hints and references, and in-depth 
answer explanations are provided through the Feedback feature. 

When you launch the software, a digital clock display will appear in the upper-right corner of the 
question window. The clock will continue to count unless you choose to end the exam by selecting Grade 
The Exam 


Removing Installation 

The Practice Exam Software is installed on your hard drive. For best results for removal of programs 
using a Windows PC use the Control Panel | Uninstall A Program option and then choose Oracle Press 
Java SE 8 Practice to uninstall. 

For best results for removal of programs using a Mac go to the Oracle Press Java SE 8 Practice folder 
inside your applications folder and drag the Oracle Press Java SE 8 Practice icon to the trash. 


Help 

A help file is provided through the Help button on the main page in the top-right corner. A readme file is 
also included in the Bonus Content folder. 


Technical Support 

Technical Support information is provided in the following sections by feature. 


Windows 8 Troubleshooting 

The following known errors on Windows 8 have been reported. Please see below for information on 
troubleshooting these known issues. 

If you get an error while installing the software, such as The application could not be installed 
because the installer file is damaged. Try obtaining the new installer from the application author, you 
may need to disable your anti-virus or Internet security programs and try installing the software again. 

You may enable the antivirus or Internet security program again after installation is complete. 

For more information on how to disable anti-virus programs in Windows, please visit the web site of 
the software provider of your anti-virus program For example, if you use Norton or MacAfee products, 
you may need to visit the Norton or the MacAfee web site and search for how to disable antivirus in 
Windows 8. Anti-virus programs are different from firewall technology, so be sure to disable the anti 
virus program, and be sure to re-enable to program after you have installed the practice exam software. 

While Windows doesnt include default antivirus software, Windows can often detect antivirus 
software installed by you or the manufacturer of your computer and typically displays the status of any 
such software in the Action Center, which is located in the Control Panel under System and Security 
(select Review Your Computers Status). Windows help feature can also provide more information on 
how to detect your anti-virus software. If the anti-virus software is on, check the Help feature that came 
with that software for information on how to disable it. 

Windows will not detect all anti-virus software. If your anti-virus software isnt displayed in the 
Action Center you can try typing the name of the software or the publisher in the Start Menus search field. 



McGraw-Hill Education Content Support 

For questions regarding the Glossary or the additional bonus content, e-mail techsolutions@mhedu.com 
or visit http://mhp.softwareassist.com. 

For questions regarding book content, e-mail hep_customer.service@mheducation.com. For 
customers outside the United States, e-mail intemational_cs@mheducation.com. 


INDEX 


A 


abandoned strings, 344-346 
abstract classes, 19 

constructors, 133, 136 
creating, 23 
implementation, 123 
vs. interfaces, 25 
overview, 21-22 
abstract methods 

inheritance, 93 
overview, 45-48 
subclass implementation, 106 
access and access modifiers, 30-33 
classes, 17-21 
constructors, 135 
encapsulation, 89 
key points, 71 
levels, 54 

local variables, 42-43 
overloaded methods, 111 
overridden methods, 107-108 
private, 3436 

protected and default members, 36-42 
public, 33-34 

static methods and variables, 151-154 
add() method in ArrayList, 383 
addition 

compound assignment, 236 
operator, 244 
precedence, 257 
ampersands (&) 

bitwise operators, 251-252 
logical operators, 252-255 
precedence, 257 
AND expressions, 252-255 
angle brackets (<>) in generic code, 381 





anonymous arrays, 372-373 
append() method, 353-354 
appending strings, 341-342, 353-354 
applications, launching, 11-12 
@argfiles options, 11 
arguments 

final, 4445 

overloaded methods, 111, 113 
overridden methods, 108 
vs. parameters, 49-50 
super constructors, 137 
variable argument lists, 49-50 
arithmetic operators, 244249 
basic, 244245 

increment and decrement, 248-250 
key points, 260-261 
remainder, 245-246 
string concatenation, 246-248 
ArithmeticException class, 322 
ArraylndexOutOfBoundsException class, 306 
description, 322 
out-of-range array indexes, 369 
superclass, 308-309 
ArrayList class, 13-14 

autoboxing, 384388 
basics, 380-381 
diamond syntax, 388-389 
duplicates, 383 
key points, 401 
methods, 382-384 
uses, 379-381 
arrays, 363 

constructing, 364367, 370-372 

declaring, 57-59, 363-364, 370-372 

default element values, 198-199, 202, 221 

element assignments, 374378 

enhanced for loops, 292-293 

indexes, 12, 368 

initializing, 368-374 

instanceof comparisons, 244 

key points, 76, 399-400 

length attribute, 350 

reference assignments, 376-378 


returning, 131 
ASCII set, 53 

AssertionError class, 316, 321 
assignments 

array elements, 374-378 
compiler errors, 188-189 
floating-point numbers, 188 
key points, 220-221 
object compatibility, 242 
operators, 182-183, 235-236, 257 
primitives, 183-185, 190 
reference variables, 190-191, 202-203, 376-378 
asterisks (*) 

compound assignment operators, 236 
import statements, 14, 16 
multiplication, 244 
precedence, 257 

autoboxing with ArrayLists, 384388 
automatic local variables, 55-57 
automatic variables. See local variables 


B 


backslashes (\) for escaped characters, 182 

base 2 (binary) integers, 178 

base 8 (octal) integers, 178-179 

base 10 (decimal) integers, 178 

base 16 (hexadecimal) literals, 178, 180 

basic for loops, 288 

conditional expressions, 289-290 
declaration and initialization, 288-289 
iteration expressions, 289-290 
loop issues, 290-292 
behaviors, description, 2 
between() method, 361 
binary (base 2) integers, 178 
binary literals, 179 
bitwise operators, 251-252 
blocks 

initialization, 145-147 
variables, 193 
boolean type and values 
bit depth, 53 




default values, 196 
do loops, 287 
in for loops, 288-289 
if statements, 276-277 
invert operator, 255-256 
literals, 181 

relational operators, 236 
while loops, 286 

braces ({}). See curly braces ({}) 
branching 

if-else, 273-277 

switch statements. See switch statements break statement 
in for loops, 290 
key points, 326 
loop constructs, 294296 
switch statements, 278, 281-283 
bugs. See exceptions 
bytes 

case constants, 278-279 
default values, 196 
and int, 184 
ranges, 53 


c 


calendar data 

classes, 357-358 
factory classes, 359 
formatting, 362 
immutability, 358-359 
key points, 398-399 
using and manipulating, 360-361 
call stack exceptions, 303-305 
CamelCase, 9 
capacity of strings, 354 
carets ( A ) 

bitwise operators, 251-252 
exclusive-OR operators, 255 
case sensitivity 

identifiers, 7 

string comparisons, 348-349 
case statements, 278-280 
casts, 184 




assignment, 235 
explicit, 185-186 
implicit, 186 
key points, 159, 220 
overview, 118-121 
precision, 188-189 
primitives, 185-188 
catch clause, 299-300 
chained methods, 356 
chaining constructors, 134 
characters and char type 
bit depth, 53 
case constants, 278-279 
comparisons, 237 
default values, 196 
literals, 181-182 
charAt() method, 348-349 
checked exceptions 

handling, 314-315 
interface implementation, 123 
overloaded methods, 111 
overridden methods, 108, 110 
ChronoUnit enum, 361 
.class files, 12 
ClassCastException class 
description, 322 
downcasts, 119 

classes 

access, 17-21 
compiling, 11 

constructors. See constructors declaring, 17-18 

defining, 9-10 

description, 2 

extending, 18, 102 

final, 20-21, 59-61 

import statements, 13-14 

interface implementation, 123 

launching applications with java, 11-12 

main() method, 12-13 

member declarations, 28 

names, 8-9, 151 

overriding, 3 

source file declaration rules, 10 


wrapper, 320 

cleaning up garbage collection, 218 
clear() method, 383 
code conventions, 7-9 
collections, 58 
colons (:) 

conditional operators, 250-251 
labels, 296 
commas (,) 

in for loops, 288-289 
variables, 185 

comments in source code files, 10 
comparisons 

instanceof, 242-244 
relational operators, 236-241 
strings, 348-349 
compiler and compiling 
casts, 119 

interface implementation, 122-123 
javac, 11 

overloaded methods, 114 
compiler errors 

assignments, 188-189 
instanceof, 244 
compound assignments 
with casts, 189 
operators, 236 
strings, 247 

concat() method, 348-349 

concatenating strings, 246-248, 261, 348-349 

concrete classes 

abstract methods implemented by, 106 
creating, 23 
subclasses, 46-47 
concrete methods, 102 
conditional operators 

key points, 261 
overview, 250-251 
conditions 

do loops, 287 

in for loops, 288-290 

if-else branching, 273-277 

switch statements. See switch statements while loops, 286 


constant specific class body, 65-66 
constants 

case, 278-279 
enum, 62 
interface, 26-27 
names, 9 
String class, 347 

constructing arrays, 364367, 370-372 
constructors, 132 

basics, 133 
calendar data, 359 
chaining, 134 
declarations, 50-51 
default, 135-137 
enums, 65-66 
inheritance, 93, 140 
key points, 75, 160-161 
overloaded, 140-145 
rules, 135-136 
strings, 341 

super() and this() calls, 144 
contains() method, 383 
continue statement 

key points, 326 
loop constructs, 294295 
controls, 17 
conventions 

code, 7-9 
identifiers, 6 
names, 2 
conversions 

return type, 131 
types. See casts 

cost reduction, object-oriented design for, 100 
counting 

instances, 148 
references, 212 
covariant returns, 129-130 
cross-platform execution, 5 
curly braces ({}) 

abstract methods, 46 
arrays, 370, 372, 374 
class members, 196, 199 


if expressions, 273, 275 
instance variables, 196 
lambdas, 395 
methods, 46 
optional, 273 


D 


D suffix, 181 
dashes (-) 

compound assignment operators, 236 
decrement operators, 248-249 
precedence, 257 
subtraction, 244 

date data 

using and manipulating, 360-361 
formatting, 362 

DateTimeFormatter class, 358, 361-362 
Deadly Diamond of Death, 102 
decimal (base 10) integers, 178 
decimal literals with underscores, 179 
declarations 

arrays, 57-59, 363-364, 370-372 
basic for loops, 288-289 
class members, 28 
classes, 17-18 
constructors, 50-51 
enhanced for loops, 293 
enum elements, 65-67 
enums, 62-64 
exceptions, 312-317 
interface constants, 26-27 
interfaces, 23-26 
polymorphic, 381 
reference variables, 53-54 
return types, 129-132 
source file rules, 10 
variables, 51-61, 75-76 
decrement operators 

key points, 261 
working with, 248-250 
default access 

description, 17 




overview, 18-19 
and protected, 30, 36-42 
default case in switch statements, 283-284 
Default protection, 30 
defaults 

constructors, 135-137 
interface methods, 28 

primitive and object type instance variables, 195-198 

defining 

classes, 9-10 
exceptions, 306-307 
delete() method, 354355 
deleting strings, 354355 
diamond syntax, 388-389 
distributed computing, 5 
division 

compound assignment, 236 
operator, 244 
precedence, 257 
do loops, 287 
dots (.) 

access, 31-32 
class names, 151 
instance references, 151 
variable argument lists, 50 
double type 

casts, 186 
default values, 196 
floating-point literals, 180 
ranges, 53 
underscores, 179 
downcasts, 119 
ducking exceptions, 303, 312 
duplicates in ArrayLists, 383 


E 


elements in arrays. See arrays 
ellipses (...) invariable argument lists, 50 
else statements, 273-277 
encapsulation 

benefits, 100 
description, 4 




key points, 157 
overview, 88-91 

reference variables, 389-390, 401 
entry points in switch statements, 281 
enums, 62 

case constants, 278-279 
constants, 62 
declaring, 62-64 
declaring elements, 65-67 
equality tests, 241 
key points, 76-77 
EOFException class, 311, 314 
equal signs (=) 

assignment, 182, 235 
boxing, 386-387 

compound assignment operators, 236 
equality tests, 237-241 
relational operators, 236-237 
equality and equality operators 
enums, 241 
objects, 386-387 
precedence, 257 
primitives, 238 
references, 238-240 
strings, 240-241, 281 
equals() method, 240-241, 386-387 
equalsIgnoreCase() method, 348-349 
Error class, 307 
Exception class, 306-307 
ExceptionlnlnitializerError class 
description, 322 
init blocks, 147 
exceptions, 298-299 

creating, 317-318 
declarations, 312-317 
defining, 306-307 
hierarchy, 307-309 
interface implementation, 123 
JVM thrown, 319-320 
key points, 327 
list of, 321-322 
matching, 309-310 
overridden methods, 108, 110 


programmatically thrown, 320-321 
propagating, 303-306 
rethrowing, 317 
sources, 319 
try and catch, 299-303 
exclamation points (!) 

boolean invert operator, 255-256 
precedence, 257 
relational operators, 236-237 
exclusive-OR (XOR) operator, 255 
execution entry points in switch statements, 281 
exit() method 

loops, 290 
try and catch, 324 
explicit casts, 185-186 
explicit values in constructors, 134 
expressions 

enhanced for loops, 293 
if statements, 276-277 
extended ASCII set, 53 
extending 

classes, 18, 102 
inheritance in, 94 
interfaces, 124 
extends keyword 

illegal uses, 127 
IS-A relationships, 97 


F 


F suffix, 181 
factory classes, 359 

fall-through in switch statements, 281-283 
false value, 181 
features and benefits, 3-5 
FileNotFoundException class, 311-312 
final arguments, 4445 
final classes, 20-21, 59-61 
final constants, 26-27 
final methods 

nonaccess member modifiers, 43-45 

overriding, 108 
final modifiers 




increment and decrement operators, 250 
variables, 42, 59 
finalize() method, 218-219 
finally clauses, 301-303 
flexibility from object orientation, 88 
float type and floating-point numbers 
assigning, 188 
casts, 187 
classes, 20 
comparisons, 237 
default values, 196 
literals, 180-181 
ranges, 53 
underscores, 179 
flow control, 272 

break and continue statements, 294295 

do loops, 287 

for loops, 287-293 

if-else branching, 273-277 

labeled statements, 295-297 

switch statements. See switch statements unlabeled statements, 295 
while loops, 285-286 

for loops 

basic, 288-292 
enhanced, 292-293 
forced exits from loops, 290 
forcing garbage collection, 215-218 
formatO method, 362 
formatting calendar data, 362 
fractions, 180 
fully qualified names, 13 


G 


garbage collection 

cleaning up before, 218 
forcing, 215-218 
key points, 222 
objects eligible for, 213-215 
overview, 210 
garbage collector 

operation, 212 
overview, 210 




running, 210 
gc() method, 215-216 
generics, 381 
get() method, 383 
getRuntime() method, 216 
getters encapsulation, 89 
greater than signs (>) 

precedence, 257 
relational operators, 236-237 
guarded regions, 299 


H 


HAS-A relationships 

key points, 157 
overview, 96-100 

heap 

garbage collection, 210 
key points, 220 
overview, 176-177 

hexadecimal (base 16) literals, 178, 180 
hiding implementation details, 89 
hierarchy of exceptions, 307-309 


I 


IDE (integrated development environment), 11 
identifiers, 2 

key points, 70 
legal, 6-7 
if-else branching 

key points, 325-326 
overview, 273-277 
IllegalArgumentException class 
description, 322 

programmatically thrown exceptions, 321 
IllegalStateException class, 322 
immutability 

calendar data, 358-359 
strings, 340-347 

implementation details, hiding, 89 
implementing interfaces 
key points, 159 






overview, 122-128 
implements keyword 

illegal uses, 127 
IS-A relationships, 97 
implicit casts 

assignment, 235 
primitives, 186 
import statements 

key points, 70 
overview, 13-14 
source code files, 10 
static, 1416 
increment operators 

key points, 261 
working with, 248-250 

indexes 

ArrayLists, 380 
arrays, 12, 368 
out-of-range, 369 
string, 348-349 
zero-based, 12 

indexOf() method, ArrayLists, 383 
IndexOutOfBoundsException class, 308 
indirect interface implementation, 243 
inheritance 

access modifiers, 31-33, 38-39 
constructors, 140 
evolution, 93-95 
HAS-A relationships, 98-100 
IS-A relationships, 96-97 
key points, 157 
multiple, 102, 126-128 
overview, 3, 92-93 
inherited methods, overriding, 109 
initialization 

arrays, 202, 368-374 
basic for loops, 288-289 
loop elements, 370 
object references, 201-202 
primitives, 199-201 
variables, 56, 185 
initialization blocks, 145-147 
inheritance, 93 


key points, 161 
inner classes, 17 
insert() method, 354355 
inserting string elements, 355 
instance methods 

inheritance, 93 
overriding, 108 
polymorphic, 104 
instance variables, 5455 
constructors, 134 
default values, 195-198 
description, 2, 193 
on heap, 176-177 
inheritance, 93 
instanceof operator 

key points, 260 
object tests, 242-243 

instances 

counting, 148 
initialization blocks, 146 
references to, 151 
instantiation, 160-161 
Integer class, 15-16, 321 
integers and int data type 
and byte, 184 
case constants, 278-279 
casts, 186-187 
comparisons, 237 
default values, 196 
literals, 178 
ranges, 53 

remainder operator, 246 
integrated development environment (IDE), 11 
interfaces, 2, 89 

vs. abstract classes, 25 
constants, 26-27 
constructors, 136 
declaring, 23-26 
extending, 124 
implementing, 122-128, 159 
indirect implementation, 243 
key points, 72-73 
methods, 28-29 


names, 8-9 
overview, 3 

invert operator, 255-256 
invoking 

overloaded methods, 112-115 
polymorphic methods, 103 
IOException class 

checked exceptions, 314 
files, 311-312 
IS-A relationships 

key points, 157 
overview, 96-97 
polymorphism, 101 
return types, 132 
ISO Latin-1 characters, 53 
isolation of references, 214215 
iteration in basic for loops, 289-290 



java command, 11-12 
java.io.IOException class 

checked exceptions, 314 
files, 311-312 

java.lang.ClassCastException class 
description, 322 
downcasts, 119 

java.lang.Exception class, 306-307 
java.lang.Integer class, 15-16, 321 
java.lang.Object class, 92 
java.lang.Object.equals() method, 240-241 
java.lang.Runtime class, 216 
java.lang.RuntimeException class, 308, 312-314 
java.lang.StringBuilder class, 340 
key points, 398 
methods, 354356 
overview, 352 
vs. StringBuffer, 352-353 
java.time.DateTimeFormatter class, 358, 361-362 
java.time.LocalDate class, 357, 362 
java.time.LocalDateTime class, 357, 362 
java.time.LocalTime class, 357, 362 
java.time.Period class, 358, 361 





java.time.temporal package, 361 
java.time.temporal.TemporalAmount interface, 358 
java.util.ArrayList class. See ArrayList class 
java.util.function.Predicate interface, 393-395 
java.util.List interface, 381 
Java Virtual Machine (JVM), 5, 11 
javac, compiling with, 11 


K 


keywords, 2, 7 



L suffix, 180 

labeled statements, 295-297 
lambdas, 390-396, 401 
launching applications, 11-12 
leaks, memory, 4 
legal identifiers, 6-7 
length() method, 350 
length of arrays and strings, 350 
less than signs (<) 

precedence, 257 
relational operators, 236-237 
libraries, 4 

lists and List interface, 381 

ArrayLists. See ArrayList class implementations, 381 

literals 

binary, 179 
boolean, 181 
character, 181-182 
floating-point, 180-181 
hexadecimal, 180 
integer, 178 
key points, 220 
octal, 179 

primitive assignments, 183-184 
strings, 182, 347 
local arrays, 202 
local object references, 201-202 
local primitives, 199-201 
local variables, 198-199 






access modifiers, 42-43 
description, 193 
key points, 74 
on stack, 55, 176-177 
working with, 55-57 
LocalDate class, 357, 362 
LocalDateTime class, 357, 362 
LocalTime class, 357, 362 
logical operators, 251 

bitwise, 251-252 
key points, 261-262 
non-short-circuit, 254256 
precedence, 257 
short-circuit, 252-254, 276-277 

long type 

default values, 196 
ranges, 53 
loop constructs, 285 

break and continue, 294295 
do, 287 

element initialization, 370 
for, 287-293 
key points, 326 
while, 285-286 

lowercase characters in strings, 351 


M 


main() method, 12-13 

exceptions, 303-305 
overloaded, 115 

maintainability, object orientation for, 88 
mark and sweep algorithm, 212 
matching exceptions, 309-310 
MAX_\7VLUE constant, 16 
meaningfully equivalent objects, 240 
member modifiers, nonaccess, 43-50 
members 

access. See access and access modifiers declaring, 28 
key points, 7475 

memory 

garbage collection. See garbage collection strings, 347 
memory leaks, 210 




memory management, 4 
methods 

abstract, 45-48 

access modifiers. See access and access modifiers ArrayLists, 382-384 

chained, 356 

description, 2 

enums, 65-66 

factory, 359 

final, 43-45, 59 

instance, 104, 108 

interface implementation, 122-123 

interfaces, 28-29 

names, 9 

native, 49 

overloaded, 111-117 
overridden, 105-111 
recursive, 320 
stacks, 303-305 
static, 61, 148-150 
strictfp, 49 
String, 348-352 
StringBuilder, 354356 
synchronized, 48-49 
variable argument lists, 49-50 
minus signs (-) 

compound assignment operators, 236 
decrement operators, 248-249 
precedence, 257 
subtraction, 244 

modifiers. See access and access modifiers 
modulus operator 

overview, 245-246 
precedence, 257 
multidimensional arrays 

constructing, 366 
declaring, 58-59, 364 
reference assignments, 377-378 
multiple inheritance, 102, 126-128 
multiplication 

compound assignment, 236 
operator, 244 
precedence, 257 
multithreaded programming, 5 


mutators in encapsulation, 89 


N 


names 

classes and interfaces, 8-9 
constants, 9 

constructors, 51, 133, 135 
conventions, 2 
dot operator, 151 
fully qualified, 13 
labels, 296 
methods, 9 

shadow variables, 208-209 
variables, 9 

narrowing conversions, 186 
native methods, 49 
negative numbers 

from casts, 189 
representing, 53 
nested classes, 17 
nested if-else statements, 273 
new keyword 

arrays, 364 
calendar data, 359 
no-arg constructors, 135-136 
NoClassDefFoundError class, 322 
nonaccess member modifiers, 19-20, 43 
abstract methods, 45-48 
final arguments, 4445 
final methods, 43-45 
key points, 71-72 

methods with variable argument lists, 49-50 
native methods, 49 
strictfp methods, 49 
synchronized methods, 48-49 
not equal operator (!=), 237 
null values 

reference variables, 183, 191 
returning, 130 
wrapper variables, 388 
nulling references, 213 
NullPointerException class, 314 




arrays, 368 
description, 322 
reference variables, 319-320 
wrapper variables, 388 

NumberFormatException class 
description, 322 
string conversions, 321 

numbers 

primitives. See primitives 
with string concatenation, 246-247 
with underscores, 178-179 


o 


Object class, 92 
object orientation (OO), 87-88 
benefits, 100 
casting, 118-121 

constructors. See constructors description, 4 
encapsulation, 88-91 
inheritance, 92-100 
initialization blocks, 145-147 
interface implementation, 122-128 
overloaded methods, 111-117 
overridden methods, 105-111 
polymorphism, 101-105 
return types, 129-132 
statics, 148-154 
objects and object references 

arrays, 58, 363-364, 374-375 
default values, 196-198 
description, 2, 183 
equality, 386-387 
garbage collection, 213-219 
on heap, 176-177 
initializing, 201-202 
instanceof comparisons, 242-244 
overloaded methods, 113-114 
passing, 205-207 
strings as, 341 

octal (base 8) integers, 178-179 
of() method, 361 
one-dimensional arrays 




constructing, 364366 
reference assignments, 376-377 
operands, 234 
operators, 233-234 

arithmetic, 244-249 
assignment, 235-236 
conditional, 250-251 
increment and decrement, 248-250 
instanceof, 242-244 
logical, 251-256 
precedence, 256-258, 262 
relational, 236-241 
OR expressions, 253-255 
order of instance initialization blocks, 146 
out-of-range array indexes, 369 
out-of-scope variables, 194 
OutOfMemoryException class, 218 
overloaded constructors, 140-145 
overloaded methods, 111 

invoking, 112-115 
key points, 158 
legal, 112, 116 
main(), 13, 115 
vs. overridden, 112, 117 
polymorphism, 115 
return types, 129 
overridden methods, 105-109 
illegal, 110-111 
invoking superclass, 109-110 
vs. overloaded, 112, 117 
polymorphism, 115 
return types, 129-130 
static, 154 
overriding 

classes, 3 
key points, 158 
private methods, 36 



package-centric languages, 17 

package-level access, 18-19 

package statement in source code files, 10 



packages 


access, 17 
classes in, 14 
parameters 

vs. arguments, 49-50 
lambdas, 395 
parentheses () 

arguments, 44, 50 
conditional operator, 250 
in for loops, 288 
if expressions, 273, 276-277 
operator precedence, 246-247, 258, 262 
string concatenation, 247 
parselnt() method, 321 
passing 

key points, 221 

object reference variables, 205-207 
pass-by-value, 206-207 
primitive variables, 207-208 
Peabody, Marc, 185 
percent signs (%) 

precedence, 257 
remainder operator, 245-246 
Period class, 358, 361 
pipe (|) characters 

bitwise operators, 251-252 
logical OR operator, 253-255 
plus signs (+) 

addition, 244 

compound assignment operators, 236 
increment operators, 248-249 
precedence, 257 
string concatenation, 246-248 
polymorphism 

abstract classes, 22 
declarations, 381 
inheritance, 95 
key points, 157 

overloaded and overridden methods, 115 
overview, 101-105 
pools for String constants, 347 
postfix increment operators, 248-249 
precedence of operators, 245, 247, 256-258, 262 


precision 


casts, 186, 188-189 
floating-point literals, 181 
floating-point numbers, 188 
Predicate interface, 393-395 
prefix increment operators, 248-249 
primitives 

arrays, 58, 363-364, 374 
assignments, 183-185, 190 
casting, 185-188, 220 
comparisons, 238 
declarations, 51-53 
default values, 195-196 
final, 59 

initializing, 199-201 
literals, 178-182 
passing, 207-208 
returning, 131 
wrapper classes, 192 
printStackTrace() method, 308 
private modifiers, 30 

overriding, 36 
overview, 3436 

programmatically thrown exceptions, 320-321 
Project Coin, diamond syntax, 388-389 
propagating uncaught exceptions, 303-306 
protected modifiers, 30, 36-42 
public access, 19 

public interface for exceptions, 312-317 
public modifiers, 30 

constants, 26-27 
encapsulation, 89 
overview, 33-34 

public static void main() method, 12-13 


Q 


question marks (?) for conditional operators, 250-251 


R 


ranges, numbers, 53 
reachable objects, 210 






reassigning reference variables, 213-214 
recursive methods, 320 
redefined static methods, 154 
reference counting, 212 
references, 101 

arrays, 368 

assigning, 190-191, 202-203 
casting, 118-121, 159 
declaring, 53-54 
description, 183 
encapsulation, 389-390, 401 
equality, 238-240 
instances, 151 
isolating, 214-215 
multidimensional arrays, 377-378 
nulling, 213 

one-dimensional arrays, 376-377 
overloaded methods, 113-114 
passing, 205-207 
reassigning, 213-214 
returning, 130 
strings, 342-347 
regions, guarded, 299 
relational operators, 236-237 
equality, 237-241 
key points, 260 
precedence, 257 
remainder operator, 245-246 
remove() method, 384 
removing ArrayList elements, 384 
replace() method, 350 
replacing string elements, 350 
rethrowing exceptions, 317 
return statement 

for loops, 290 
lambdas, 395 
return type 

constructors, 51, 133, 135 
declarations, 129-132 
key points, 159 
overloaded methods, 111, 129 
overridden methods, 108, 129-130 
returning values, 130-131 


reuse 

inheritance for, 94 
names, 208-209 
reverse() method, 355 
reversing strings, 355 
rules 

constructors, 135-136 
source file, 10 
Runtime class, 216 

runtime exceptions for overridden methods, 108 
RuntimeException class, 308, 312-314 


s 


sandbox, 5 
scope 

infer loops, 291 
key points, 220 
variables, 192-195 
security, 5 
semicolons (;) 

abstract methods, 22, 45 
enums, 64 
in for loops, 288 
labels, 296 
lambdas, 395 
native methods, 49 
while loops, 287 
serialization, 5 
setters encapsulation, 89 
shadowed variables, 56, 193, 208-209 
short-circuit logical operators 
if statements, 276-277 
overview, 252-254 
precedence, 257 

short type 

case constants, 278-279 
default values, 196 
ranges, 53 

signatures of methods, 117, 123 

signed numbers, 53 

size 

ArrayLists, 383-384 




arrays, 59, 364, 366, 370, 372, 374 
assignment issues, 235 
numbers, 53 
size() method, 383-384 
slashes (/) 

compound assignment operators, 236 
division, 244 
precedence, 257 

source code file declaration rules, 10, 71 
square brackets ([]) 

array elements, 58 
arrays, 363 

stack 

exceptions, 320 
key points, 220 
local variables, 55 
methods, 303-305 
overview, 176-177 
StackOverflowError class 
description, 322 
recursive methods, 320 

states, 2 

static constants, 26-27 
static imports, 1416 
static initialization blocks, 146 
static interface methods, 28-29 
static variables and methods, 1415, 61 
constructors, 136 
description, 193 
inheritance, 93 
key points, 76, 161 
overriding, 109, 154 
overview, 148-150 
streams, 390 
strictfp modifiers 

classes, 19-20 
methods, 49 
String class, 340-347 

constant pool, 347 
key points, 398 
methods, 348-352 
object references, 203-204 
StringBuffer class, 340, 352-353 


StringBuilder class, 340 
key points, 398 
methods, 354356 
overview, 352 
vs. StringBuffer, 352-353 
StringlndexOutOfBoundsException class, 308-309 
strings, 340 

appending, 341-342, 353-354 
case constants, 278-279 
comparing, 348-349 
concatenating, 246-248, 261, 348-349 
creating, 348 
deleting, 354355 
equality, 240-241, 281 
immutability, 340-347 
inserting elements into, 355 
key points, 398 
length, 350 
literals, 182, 347 
lower case, 351 
memory, 347 
methods, 348-352 
replacing elements in, 350 
reversing, 355 
substrings, 350-351 
trimming, 352 
upper case, 351 
strong typing, 5 
subclasses 

concrete, 46-47 
inheritance, 3 

substring() method, 350-351 
subtraction 

compound assignment, 236 
operator, 244 
precedence, 257 

subtypes for reference variables, 101 
super() calls for constructors, 144 
super constructor arguments, 137 
superclasses, 3 

constructors, 135 
overridden methods, 109-110 
switch statements, 278 


break and fall-through, 281-283 
default case, 283-284 
exercise, 285 
key points, 325-326 
legal expressions, 278-280 
string equality, 281 
synchronization methods, 48-49 
System. exit() method 
loops, 290 
try and catch, 324 
System.gc() method, 215-216 



TemporalAmount interface, 358 
ternary operator 

conditional, 250-251 
key points, 261 
test() method, 393, 396 
this() calls for constructors, 135, 144 
this keyword, 57 
threads in garbage collector, 212 
three-dimensional arrays, 59, 364 
Throwable class, 307 
thrown exceptions 

description, 299 
JVM, 319-320 
programmatically, 320-321 

time data 

using and manipulating, 360-361 
formatting, 362 
toLowerCase() method, 351 
toString() method 

ArrayLists, 381 
String, 351 
StringBuilder, 356 
toUpperCase() method, 351 
transient variables, 60-61 
trim() method, 352 
true value, 181 
truncating from casts, 189 
try and catch feature 

finally, 301-303 



overview, 299-300 
two-dimensional arrays, 59, 364 
twos complement notation and casts, 189 
types 

array declarations, 363 
assignments, 235 
casting. See casts 
return. See return type 
variables, 183 


u 


\u prefix, 181 

UML (Unified Modeling Language), 100 
unary operators, precedence, 257 
unassigned variables 

key points, 221 
working with, 195-199 
uncaught exceptions, 303-306 
unchecked exceptions 

description, 314-315 
overridden methods, 108 
underscores (_) in numeric literals, 178-179 
Unicode characters 

char type, 53 
identifiers, 6 
literals, 181 
strings, 341 

Unified Modeling Language (UML), 100 
uninitialized variables 

key points, 221 
working with, 195-199 
unlabeled statements, 295 
until() method, 361 
unwinding the stack, 308 
upcasting, 120 
upper case for strings, 351 


V 


values() method, 66 
values of variables, 182 
var-args 






key points, 75 
methods, 49-50 
variable argument lists, 49-50 
variables 

access. See access and access modifiers assignments. See assignments declarations, 51-53, 75- 
76 

description, 2 
enums, 65-66 
final, 59 

infer loops, 291 
heap and stack, 176-177 
initializing, 185 
instance, 5455 
local. See local variables 
names, 9 

primitives, 51-53 
scope, 192-195 
shadow, 208-209 
static, 61, 148-150 
transient, 60-61 

uninitialized and unassigned, 195-199, 221 
values, 182 
volatile, 61 
vertical bars (|) 

bitwise operators, 251-252 
logical OR operator, 253-255 
precedence, 257 
visibility, access, 18, 43 
void return type, 131 
volatile variables, 61 


w 


Walraven, Fritz, 258 
while loops 

labeled, 297 
working with, 285-286 
whitespace, trimming from strings, 352 
widening conversions, 186 
wildcards in import statements, 14, 16 
wrapper classes 

primitives, 192 
strings, 320 




wrappers, ArrayLists, 384388 


X 


XOR (exclusive-OR) operator, 255 


z 


zero-based indexes, 12 
Ox prefix, 179 






Join the Largest 
Tech Community 
in the World 

Download the latest software, tools, 
and developer templates 

Get exclusive access to hands-on 
trainings and workshops 

Grow your professional network through 
the Oracle ACE Program 

Publish your technical articles - and 
get paid to share your expertise 

Join the OracleTechnology Network 
Membership is free. Visit community.oracJe.com 

@OradeOTN face boo k.conWOracleTeehnology Net work 

I 
I 

- MI'S, ila jtfilijlt*. AJI righSi. Or*gl* ird Si;i zto gif!grtd Ir+itmiffcj yjid gr Hf illilulw. 













Push a Button 

Move Your Java Apps 
to the Oracle Cloud 




Same Java Runtime 


Same Dev Tools 
Same Standards 
Same Architecture 



or Back to Your Data Center 



doud-oracle.com/java 


Copyright 2GIG, Graf !r and nr i;i A I riflto* rSMfvtd Oracle ,<-d J y;a Are rendered Iftdt midi o! Graclr and c i's iff.  Ic i. 














.ibraries 

om THE RIGHT QM 


ORACLE 


GUARDING THE 


GROWN JEWELS 


-Tv- , ..... ... 

PRO F 1 TI 

u 




laid^^ZIFK! 


ORACLE 

MAGAZINE 


Reach More than 640,000 Oracle Customers 
with Oracle Publishing Group 

Connect with the Audience that Matters Most to Your Business 

Oracle Magazine 

Tfte Lsfgest IT Publication i-i no World 

Circulation: 3?5,f}Q0 

Audience; ;T Managers, DBAs H Programmers, and Dcvelcpens 


pr( wrru 


Profit 

Suslrstoss Insight for Ent&roriso-Class Business Leaders io Hefei Them Buitd 
a Sutler Business Ushg Grace Technoiogy 

Cir^JU^EiOrt: yC.OOO 

Audience: Tap E aecu Lives and Line of Business Managers 



Java Magazine 

The Fssential Source on Java Technology, the Java Program-^ ng \ arg,:age r 
suid Java-Based Appl cations 
Circulation; 223,00 and Grtwirg Steady 

Audience; Corporate and Independent Java Developers, Programmers, 
ard Architects 



For more information 
or io sign ujj fer a FREE 
subscription: $m <ho 
OR coda tp vis t Oracle 
Publishing online. 


Copya$m !< 30IEh Oracle antyo r hs afl etas. An r?ghts reserved. Otaoe and Java a-'e registered tJ-adamaifcs of Orac'e and/or 
ns an :e;es Other na^es trfldemjrks 01 cNjir re&pfri.ve owrwr&, 


ORACLE 




























Beta Test 
Oracle 
Software 

Get a first look at our newest productsand help 
perfect them. You must meet the following criteria: 

yf Licensed Oracle customer or 

Oracle Partner Network member 

? Oracle software expert 

Early adopter of Oracle products 


Please apply at: pdpm.oracIexom/BPO/userprofile 



It your intareSIs match upcoming activilieS, wa'll contact you. Pcoliles are kept on Ul& for 12 months. 
C*pyrigh( I JflU, Grislfr Jntf r frr i<$ sffiliJCOi. Al| iigtas 0*4tl 3nd Jm left r0 fl i jWrfrrf ofOidG JfiJ'Or ilt iffilrJUfll, 











Bel i eve that Oracle 
certification improved 
their earning power* 


Think about it97 percent of the Fortune 500 companies run Oracle solutions. Why wouldn't you 
choose Oracle certification to secure your future? With certification through Oracle, your resume 
gets noticed, your chances of landing your dream job improve, you become more marketable, 
and you earn more money. It's simple. Oracle certification helps you get hired and get 
paid for your skills. 


Hiring managers who 
say IT certifications 
are beneficial and 
provide value to the 
company 1 


Take the next step 

http://education.oracle.com/certification/press 


ORACLE' 


(1J "Value of JT CerEflisaiionsr CtenpTM, toter 34, 2014, |2| Oracte Dcrultaren Survey, [3] Xcrdlicaiiort. \\$ a Jaur- 
ney Iftu a Dastinadon" CBftfica&on Magazine 2015 Sals*, (dsiion, [4] "She Fuiure Vakffl ol Certlicahons fosighB 
fiOm Imfcedlns dm Tnowf ATP 2G15 Infltirii':ans is Tesrifig, [5) Cefiificaiim Magazine 2D 15 Annual Salary Sisp.iy 
Doptrigh.^ 20i!x Grads sfKl/or iss aflitres. Ail iifjlis rasaved. Gracte and Jm as retsterad uaiSemarta of Oracle aod/oi itsstaK. 
OtfW flam may be imdemarte b 1 Aar ttgtiONt dinners. 


Say that Oracle 
certification gives them 
credibility when looking 
for a new job 2 


Think that certification 
has made them more in 
demand 3 




Increased Linked In profile 
views for people with 
certifications, boasting 
their visibility and career 
opportunities^ 


Climb the Career Ladder 













Find the latest information on Oracle products and 
technologies. Get exclusive discounts on Oracle 
Press books. Interact with expert Oracle Press 
authors and other Oracle Press Community members. 
Read blog posts, download content and multimedia, 
and so much more. Join today! 

Join the Oracle Press Community today 
and get these benefits: 

 Exclusive members-oniy discounts and offers 



 Full access to alJ the features on the site: sample 
chapters, free code and downloads, author blogs, 
podcasts, videos, and more 

 Interact with authors and Oracle enthusiasts 

 Follow your favorite authors and topics and 
receive updates 

 Newsletter packed with exclusive offers and 
discounts, sneak previews, and author podcasts 
and interviews 





Oracle 

Press 


^0 SOrade Press 